G L O S S A RY
A
- Abiotic
A nonliving (physical or chemical) component of the
12
environment.
- (Absolute) Abundance
The total number of a kind of ﬁsh in a population; this
is rarely known, and usually estimated from the relative
abundance.10 (see Abundance Index)
- Abundance Index
A relative measure of the weight or number of ﬁsh in
a stock, a segment of the stock (e.g. the spawners), or
an area. Often available in time series, the information
is collected through scientiﬁc surveys or inferred from
5
ﬁshery data.
- Abyssal Plain
The ocean ﬂoor offshore from the continental margin,
12
usually very ﬂat with a slight slope.
- Abyssalpelagic Zone
The pelagic environment from a depth of approximately
12
4,000 meters to 7,000 meters.
- Abyssal Zone
The bottom from a depth of approximately 4,000 meters
12
to 7,000 meters.
- Acceptable Biological Catch (ABC)
A scientiﬁc calculation of the sustainable harvest
level for a species or species group, and is used to set
the upper limit on the range of potential annual total
1,4
allowable catch (TAC). (see Allowable Biological
Catch)
- Accuracy
Of an estimate: an indicator of the closeness of an
estimated value (e.g. population parameter) to the
actual value. It should not be confused with precision,
which relates to the conﬁdence limits (variability) of the
5
estimate and can always be computed from the samples.
(see Precision)

JUNE 2006

- Acoustic Survey
A systematic method of gathering information on ﬁsh
availability and abundance in a water body with the
help of sophisticated acoustic instruments, such as echo
sounders and sonar, that generate ultrasonic sound for
5
the detection of ﬁsh.
- Adaptive Management
1. A management process involving step-wise evolution
of a ﬂexible management system in response to
feedback information actively collected to check or test
its performance (in biological, social, and economic
terms). It may involve deliberate intervention to test the
ﬁshery system’s response; 2. The process of improving
management effectiveness by learning from the results
5
of carefully designed decisions or experiments.
- Advisory Panel (AP)
Provides additional review and stakeholder perspective
to a regional ﬁshery management council (FMC) for
proposed actions and draft amendments to ﬁshery
management plans (FMPs). The advisory panel usually
represents a variety of interests from commercial,
recreational, environmental, and consumer areas.
However, panel members do not have seats on the
2
council and do not vote. (see Scientiﬁc and Statistical
Committee)
- Age
The number of years of life completed, here indicated
by an Arabic numeral, followed by a plus sign if there is
5
any possibility of ambiguity (age 1, age 1+).
- Age Class
A group of individuals of the same age range in a
population. The age 0 group are the ﬁsh in their ﬁrst
year of life. A ﬁsh born in April of a given year remains
in the age 0 group until April of the following year. The
term usually refers to a year class in long-lived annually
breeding species, but shorter units of time are also used,
particularly in the tropics.5
- Age Frequency or Age Structure
A breakdown of the different age groups of a kind of ﬁsh
in a population or sample.2

1

- Age-Length Key
One approach used to assign ages to ﬁsh, given length
measurements. Used to convert catch-at-size data into
catch-at-age data. The keys specify the probability that
ﬁsh of a given size belong to one of several age groups.5
(see Length-Weight Relationship)
- Allowable Biological Catch (ABC)
A term that refers to the range of estimated allowable
catch for a species of species group. It is set each year
by a scientiﬁc group. The ABC estimates are used to set
4
the annual total allowable catch (TAC). (see Acceptable
Biological Catch)
- Allocation
1. Distribution of the opportunity to ﬁsh among user
groups or individuals. The share a user group gets
is sometimes based on historic harvest amounts; 2.
A quantity of catch, effort, or biomass attributed to a
person, a vessel, and a ﬁshing company. The allocation
can be absolute (e.g. a number of tons) or relative (e.g. a
5
percentage of the annual allowable catch).
- Alternatives
In the context of an environmental impact statement
for annual ﬁsheries management measures, alternatives
are different suites of optimum yields and management
1
actions that could be used to manage ﬁsheries.
- Anadromous
Fishes that migrate as juveniles from freshwater
to saltwater and then return as adults to spawn in
freshwater; most Paciﬁc salmon are anadromous.4
- Angler
A person catching ﬁsh or shellﬁsh with no intent to sell,
including people releasing the catch.10 (see Recreational
Fishery)
- Annual (Total) Mortality (Rate)
1. The rate of death, usually in terms of a percentage of
ﬁsh dying from a population in one year, due to both
ﬁshing and natural causes2; 2. The ratio of the number
of ﬁsh which die during a year divided by the number
alive at the beginning of that year.5
- Anoxic
The condition of oxygen deﬁciency or absence of
oxygen. Anoxic sediments and anoxic bottom waters
are commonly produced where there is a deﬁciency of
oxygen due to very high organic productivity and a lack
of oxygen replenishment to the water or sediment, as
in the case of stagnation or stratiﬁcation of the water
12
body.

2

- Aphotic
Light level modiﬁer of the deep epipelagic ocean
ecosystem, and turbid regions of all other waters; areas
12
never reached by natural light.
- Aquaculture
The farming of aquatic organisms including ﬁsh,
mollusks, crustaceans, and aquatic plants with some
sort of intervention in the rearing process to enhance
production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection
from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or
5
corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated.
- Archipelago
A group of islands; an expanse of water with scattered
12
islands.
- Area Closure
The closure to ﬁshing by particular gear(s) of an entire
ﬁshing ground, or a part of it, for the protection of a
section of the population (e.g. spawners, juveniles), the
whole population, or several populations. The closure is
usually seasonal but it could be permanent.5
- Artisanal Fishery
A ﬁshery based on traditional or small-scale gear and
boats.10
- Assemblage
1. An association of coexisting species, in space and
time, with similar environmental tolerance, possibly
trophic relationships, but not totally interdependent;
2. A collection of species inhabiting a given area,
the interactions between the species, if any, being
unspeciﬁed.5
- Assessment
A judgment made by a scientist or scientiﬁc body on
the state of a resource, such as a ﬁsh stock (e.g. size
of the stock, potential yield, on whether it is over- or
underexploited), usually for the purpose of passing
5
advice to a management authority.
- Assessment Level
Categories of the level of complexity of, and data
available for each assessment: index of abundance
(Index), yield-per-recruit analysis (Yield), analysis of
the age structure of the catch (Age Structure), analysis
including the relationship between recruitment and
spawning stock size (Spawning Stock), and assessment
that allows prediction of future (1or 2 years ahead) stock
6
sizes and catches (predictive).
- Associated Species
Those species that (a) prey upon the target species, (b)
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

are preyed on by it, (c) compete with it for food, living
space, etc., or (d) co-occur in the same ﬁshing area and
are exploited (or accidentally taken) in the same ﬁshery
or ﬁsheries. These interactions can occur at any stage
of the life cycle of one or other species and the range of
5
species concerned can therefore be very large.
- Atoll
Earthform consisting of a ringlike perimeter reef area,
12
often with a reef islet, enclosing a lagoon area. (see
Lagoon, Reef)
- Availability
1. The fraction of a ﬁsh population which lives in
regions where it is susceptible to ﬁshing during a given
ﬁshing season. This fraction receives recruits from or
becomes mingled with the non-available part of the
stock at other seasons, or in other years (any more or
less completely isolated segment of the population is
best treated as a separate stock); 2. The proportion of
a stock which is susceptible to ﬁshing. Fish become
“available” to ﬁsheries through migration, growth and
/or change of behavior (from pelagic to demersal). If
an available section of a stock is sufﬁciently isolated
from the rest of the stock, it could be considered a
management unit and be managed as such; 3. Describes
whether a certain kind of ﬁsh of a certain size can be
5
caught by a type of gear in an area.

B
- B0 (B“zero”)
Unﬁshed or virgin biomass. Rarely known. Using
mathematical models, it is generally calculated as
the long-term average biomass value expected in the
absence of ﬁshing mortality. In production models, B0
is also known as carrying capacity. It is often used as a
5
biological reference point in ﬁsheries management.
- BMSY
1. Long-term average biomass that would be achieved
if ﬁshing at a constant ﬁshing mortality rate equal to
FMSY2,3; 2. The weight (biomass) of a group of ﬁsh
necessary to produce maximum sustainable yield
(MSY).4
- Bag Limit
The number and/or size of a species that a person can
legally take in a day or trip. This may or may not be the
2
same as a possession limit.

JUNE 2006

- Bank
Submerged earthform with a crest at a depth of 20–200
meters in oceanic waters and of 0–5 meters in nearshore
12
and neritic waters. (see Nearshore, Neritic Zone)
- Barrier Island
A sedimentary island, generally elongate and low, that
is built by longshore transport or wave action parallel to
the coast.12
- Barrier Reef
A reef growing offshore from a land mass and separated
from the shoreline, often by a lagoon or estuary.12 (see
Estuary, Lagoon)
- Baseline
A set of reference data sets or analyses used for
comparative purposes; it can be based on a reference
year or a reference set of (standard) conditions.5
- Basin
12
Any large depression in which sediments are deposited.
- Bathyl Zone
The seaﬂoor between depths of 1,000 meters and
12
approximately 4,000 meters.
- Bathymetry
Pertaining to the depth and relief of water basins.12
- Bathypelagic Zone
The pelagic environment between depths of 1,000
meters and 4,000 meters.12
- Bayesian
A formal statistical approach in which expert knowledge
or beliefs are analyzed together with data. Bayesian
methods make explicit use of probability for quantifying
uncertainty. Bayesian methods are particularly useful for
5
making decision analyses. (see Monte Carlo)
- Beach
A sloped sediment shoreline composed of sand, gravel,
cobble, mud, or boulder-sized sediments, sometimes
with beach rock.12
- Benthic
1. Deﬁning a habitat or organism found on the sea
bottom10; 2. Of or pertaining to the seaﬂoor (or bottom)
12
of a water body. (see Demersal, Pelagic)
- Benthos
Organisms that live on or in the seabottom.12

3

- Best Available Science
The term “best available science” comes from National
Standard 2 listed in the Magnuson-Stevens Act, and
is the informational standard mandated for decision
making.1
- Bias
A systematic difference between the expected value of a
statistical estimate, and the quantity it estimates.5
- Billﬁsh
A group of tuna-like ﬁsh species comprising marlins,
sailﬁsh, and spearﬁsh, and which are characterized by a
5
snout which extends into a bill or spear.
- Bioaccumulation
The buildup over time, within animal tissues, of
substance (e.g. heavy metals) that cannot be excreted by
an organism.1
- Bioeconomic Modeling
Mathematical formulae that simulate the interaction
between biological behavior of ﬁsh stocks and human
behavior of users of the resource as it is shaped by
economic factors.9

- Biomass (B)
1. Or standing stock. The total weight of a group (or
stock) of living organisms (e.g. ﬁsh, plankton) or of
some deﬁned fraction of it (e.g. spawners) in an area,
at a particular time; 2. Measure of the quantity, usually
by weight in pounds or metric tons (2,205 pounds or 1
5
metric ton), of a stock at a given time.

- Biogeography
The distribution of one or more species that is deﬁned
by abiotic factors (temperature, salinity, surface currents,
12
etc.).

- Biota
The plant and animal life characteristic of a speciﬁc
14
region or biosphere, or given time period.

- Biological Assessment
An assessment conducted as part of the Endangered
1
Species Act (ESA).

- Biotic
Pertaining to the living components of their
12
environment.

- Biological Diversity (Biodiversity)
1. The variety and variability among living organisms
from all sources, including terrestrial, marine, and
other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes
of which they are part; this includes diversity within
species, between species, and of ecosystems. Diversity
indices are measures of richness (the number of species
in a system) and may reﬂect ecosystem stresses (such as
those due to high ﬁshing intensity); 2. Includes genetic
diversity (within species), species diversity (within
5
ecosystems), and ecosystem diversity. (see Species
Diversity)

- Blocked Quota Shares
In Alaska, quota shares in the Alaskan halibut and
sableﬁsh individual ﬁshing quota (IFQ) program that
are not allowed to be subdivided when transferred.
There are limits on the size of the blocked quota and on
the number of blocks that an individual may own in a
given area. This is intended to ensure the availability of
small units of quota for purchase by new entrants.13 (see
Unblocked Quota Shares)

- Biological Opinion
A scientiﬁc assessment issued by the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) or U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (USFWS), as required by the Endangered
Species Act (ESA) for listed species. Determines the
likelihood of an action to jeopardize the existence of a
species listed under the ESA.1
4

- Biological Reference Points
1. A biological benchmark against which the abundance
of the stock or the ﬁshing mortality rate can be measured
in order to determine its status. These reference points
can be used as limits or targets, depending on their
5
intended usage ; 2. Speciﬁc values for the variables
that describe the state of a ﬁshery system which are
used to evaluate its status. Reference points are most
often speciﬁed in terms of ﬁshing mortality rate and/or
spawning stock biomass. These may indicate (a) a
desired state of the ﬁshery, such as a ﬁshing mortality
rate that will achieve a high level of sustainable yield, or
(b) a state of the ﬁshery that should be avoided, such as
a high ﬁshing mortality rate which risks a stock collapse
and long-term loss of potential yield. The former are
referred to as “target reference points,” and the latter are
referred to as “limit reference points” or “thresholds.”
3
Some common examples are F0.1, FMAX, and FMSY.

- Bloom
A sudden increase in the abundance of alga or
phytoplankton resulting in a contiguous mass of highly
concentrated phytoplankton in the water column.12
- Bony Fishes
Fishes with a calciﬁed hard skeleton and belonging to
Class Osteichthyes; includes most ﬁsh species except
10
sharks, rays, skates, hagﬁsh, and lampreys.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Bootstrap
A statistical methodology used to quantify the
uncertainty associated with estimates obtained from a
model. The bootstrap is often based on Monte Carlo
resampling of residuals from the initial model ﬁt.5
(see Monte Carlo )
- Boundary Current
Large-scale water stream in the upper ocean that
separates water masses; is driven by a combination of
wind, temperature, geostrophic, or coriolis effects.12
- Buﬀer Zone
The area that separates the core from areas in which
human activities that threaten it occur.14
- Bycatch
Fish other than the primary target species that are caught
incidental to the harvest of the primary species. Bycatch
may be retained or discarded. Discards may occur for
regulatory or economic reasons.13

- Carrying Capacity
1. The maximum population of a species that an area
or speciﬁc ecosystem can support indeﬁnitely without
deterioration of the character and quality of the resource;
2. The level of use, at a given level of management, at
which a natural or man-made resource can sustain itself
over a long period of time. For example, the maximum
level of recreational use, in terms of numbers of people
and types of activity, that can be accommodated before
5
the ecological value of the area declines.
- Cash Flow Analysis
A type of ﬁnancial analysis that compares the timing and
amount of cash inﬂows with the timing and amount of
cash outﬂows. A ﬁrm’s cash ﬂow position can greatly
affect its ability to remain in business. These effects may
not be apparent from a cost-beneﬁt analysis.9
- Catadromous
Fishes that spend most of their life in freshwater and
then migrate into saltwater to spawn.10

- Bycatch Reduction (Excluder) Device
A device inserted in a ﬁshing gear (usually trawl nets,
close to the codend) to allow escapement, alive, of
unwanted (nontarget and prohibited) species (e.g.
jellyﬁsh), smaller ﬁsh (juveniles), and threatened or
5
endangered species (e.g. sea turtles, marine mammals).

- Catch
1. To undertake any activity that results in taking ﬁsh out
of its environment dead or alive. To bring ﬁsh on board
a vessel dead or alive; 2. The total number (or weight) of
ﬁsh caught by ﬁshing operations. Catch should include
all ﬁsh killed by the act of ﬁshing, not just those landed;
3. The component of ﬁsh encounter-ing ﬁshing gear,
5
which is retained by the gear.

C

Comment: The catch is usually expressed in terms of
wet weight. It refers sometimes to the total amount
caught, and sometimes only to the amount landed. The
ﬁsh which are not landed, but returned to the sea, are
5
called discards.

- CAGEAN
Catch-at-age analysis. An analysis used to reconstruct
the population history of long-lived ﬁsh stocks. They
provide an estimate of the current “exploitable biomass”
(the part of the population that can be ﬁshed), upon
which the harvest rate is based.1
- Capability
The ability to do something with the capacity you have;
the capacity to be used, treated, or developed for a
8
speciﬁc purpose.
- Capacity
1. The ability to sustain, harvest, hold, or process; 2.
The maximum amount that can be produced per unit
of time with existing plant and equipment, provided
the availability of variable factors of production is not
restricted.5

JUNE 2006

- Catchability
1. In general, the extent to which a stock is susceptible
5
to ﬁshing. (see Vulnerability)
Comment: Catchability often increases with
developments in ﬁshing technology, and so needs to be
monitored. It depends on the habits of the ﬁsh as well as
on the type and deployment of ﬁshing gear. It may also
depend on the abundance of the ﬁsh (e.g. less abundant
ﬁsh may be more catchable due to less saturation of
gear or to concentration in schools). Speciﬁc climatic
conditions may result in increased or decreased
availability of the ﬁsh. This would lead to increased
(or decreased) catchability and, thus, increased (or
decreased) ﬁshing mortality rate with the same ﬁshing
effort.5

5

- Catchability Coeﬃcient (q)
1. In ﬁsheries models, the factor (q) relates abundance
to stock size (x = qN) and ﬁshing mortality to ﬁshing
effort (F = qf). Following the latter, (q) is a measure of
ﬁshing mortality generated on a stock by one unit of
effort; 2. The fraction of a ﬁsh stock which is caught
by a deﬁned unit of the ﬁshing effort. When the unit
is small enough that it catches only a small part of the
stock—0.01 or less—it can be used as an instantaneous
5
rate in computing population change.
- Catch Curve
A breakdown of different age groups of ﬁsh, showing
the decrease in numbers of ﬁsh caught as the ﬁsh
become older and less numerous or less available. Catch
2
curves are often used to estimate total mortality.
- Catcher Vessel
Vessel that harvests ﬁsh but does not have onboard
13
processing capacity.
- Catcher-Processor Vessel
Vessel that can both catch and process the catch
onboard. Also referred to as factory trawlers or freezerlongliners.13
Catch Per Unit (of) Eﬀort (CPUE)
The quantity of ﬁsh caught (in number or in weight)
with one standard unit of ﬁshing effort; e.g. number of
ﬁsh taken per 1,000 hooks per day or weight of ﬁsh,
in tons, taken per hour of trawling. CPUE is often
considered an index of ﬁsh biomass (or abundance).
Sometimes referred to as catch rate. CPUE may be used
as a measure of economic efﬁciency of ﬁshing as well as
an index of ﬁsh abundance. Also called: catch per effort,
5
ﬁshing success, availability.
- Catch Rate
Means sometimes the amount of catch per unit time and
5
sometimes the catch per unit effort.
- Ceremonial and Subsistence
A harvest category speciﬁc to Native American tribes
1
representing ﬁshing rights granted by treaty.
- Cetaceans
Marine mammals of the Order Cetacea. Includes
5
whales, dolphins, and porpoises.
- Charter Boat
Any vessel-for-hire engaged in recreational ﬁshing
and hired for a charter fee by an individual or group of
individuals (for the exclusive use of that individual or
group of individuals), which results in that vessel being

6

unavailable for hire to any other individual or group of
9
individuals during the period of the charter.
- Closed Season
Seasonal closure. The banning of ﬁshing activity (in an
area or of an entire ﬁshery) for a few weeks or months,
usually to protect juveniles or spawners.5
- Coastal Pelagic Species
Schooling ﬁsh not associated with the ocean bottom that
migrate in coastal waters. They usually eat plankton
and are the main food source for higher-level predators
such as tuna, salmon, most groundﬁsh, and humans.
1
Examples include herring, squid, sardine, and mackerel.
- Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA)
The main objective of the CZMA is to encourage and
assist states in developing coastal zone management
programs, to coordinate state activities, and to safeguard
the regional and national interests in the coastal zone.
It requires that any Federal activity (including ﬁshery
management regulations) directly affecting the coastal
zone of a state be consistent with that state’s approved
coastal zone management program, since activities
that take place beyond the territorial sea may affect the
1
coastal zone.
- Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
A codiﬁcation of the regulations published in the Federal
Register by the executive departments and agencies
of the Federal government. The CFR is divided into
50 titles that represent broad areas subject to Federal
regulation. Title 50 contains wildlife and ﬁsheries
1
regulations. (see Proposed Rule)
- Coded-wire Tag
Coded-wire tags are small pieces of stainless steel wire
that are injected into the snouts of juvenile salmon and
steelhead. Each tag is etched with a binary code that
1
identiﬁes its release group.
- Codend
The end of a trawl net that retains the catch and the part
of the net where most size-selection takes place. Codend
mesh sizes and structure are usually regulated and may
5
be preceded by a sorting grid to reduce bycatch. (see
Bycatch Reduction Device)
- Coeﬃcient of Variation (CV)
The standard error of a statistic, divided by its point
estimate. The CV gives an idea of the precision of an
5
estimate, independent of its magnitude.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Cohort
1. In a stock, a group of ﬁsh generated during the same
spawning season and born during the same time period;
2. In cold and temperate areas, where ﬁsh are long-lived,
a cohort corresponds usually to ﬁsh born during the
same year (a year class). For instance, the 1987 cohort
would refer to ﬁsh that are age 0 in 1987, age 1 in 1988,
and so on. In the tropics, where ﬁsh tend to be shortlived, cohorts may refer to shorter time intervals (e.g.
5
spring cohort, autumn cohort, monthly cohorts). (see
Year Class)
- Cohort Analysis
A retrospective analysis of the catches obtained from a
given year class at each age (or length interval) over its
life in the ﬁshery. Allows estimation of ﬁshing mortality
and abundance at each age as well as recruitment.
Involves the use of a simpliﬁed algorithm based on an
approximation that assumes that, in a given time period,
all ﬁshing takes place instantaneously in the middle of
the time period.5 (see Virtual Population Analysis)
- Cohort Replacement Rate
The rate at which each subsequent cohort or generation
replaces the previous one.1
- Commercial Fishery
A term related to the whole process of catching and
marketing ﬁsh and shellﬁsh for sale. It refers to and
includes ﬁsheries resources, ﬁshermen, and related
businesses.2
- Common Property
Form of resource ownership with a set of well-deﬁned
users capable of excluding other potential users and
having well-understood rules regarding their rights and
obligations with respect to other users and the resource.13
- Common Property Resource
A term that indicates a resource owned by the public.
It can be ﬁsh in public waters, trees on public land, or
the air. The government regulates the use of a common
property resource to ensure its future beneﬁts.2
- Community
The populations that live and interact physically and
temporally in the same area.12
- Community Development Quota (CDQ)
Program in western Alaska under which a percentage
of the total allowable catch (TAC) of Bering
Sea commercial ﬁsheries is allocated to speciﬁc
communities. Communities eligible for this program
must be located within 50 miles of the Bering Sea

JUNE 2006

coast, or on an island within the Bering Sea; meet
criteria established by the State of Alaska; be a village
certiﬁed by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act; and consist of
residents who conduct more than half of their current
commercial or subsistence ﬁshing in the Bering Sea or
waters surrounding the Aleutian Islands. Currently 7.5%
of the TAC in the pollock, halibut, sableﬁsh, crab, and
groundﬁsh ﬁsheries is allocated to the CDQ program.13
- Compensatory Growth
An increase in growth rate shown by ﬁshes when their
populations fall below a certain level; possibly caused
by decreased competition between individuals for food
or space.10
- Compensatory Survival
A decrease in the rate of natural deaths that some ﬁshes
may show when their populations fall below a certain
level; possibly caused by decreased competition between
individuals for food or space.10 (see Natural Mortality)
- Conceptual Model
A depiction or representation of the most current
understanding of the major ecosystem features and
processes (including biological, physical, chemical, and
geopmorphic components) of a particular environment
12
(e.g. estuaries).
- Condition Factor (K)
A mathematical measurement of the degree of
“plumpness,” or the general health of a ﬁsh or group of
ﬁshes.10
- Conﬁdence Interval (CI)
The probability, based on statistics, that a number will
be between an upper and lower limit.2
- Connectivity
The movement of organisms from place to place (e.g.
among marine reserves) through dispersal or migration.14
(see Marine Reserves)
- Consumer Surplus
The welfare (or well-being) consumers derive from a
good or service, represented by the difference between
the maximum a consumer is willing to pay for a
good or service and what the consumer actually pays.
“Consumer” also applies to those gaining value from
non-consumptive uses (e.g. observing salmon runs) and
to nonuse beneﬁts (e.g. protecting marine mammals
9
from exploitation). (see Producer Surplus, Total
Welfare)

7

- Contiguous Fishery Zone (CFZ)
The 9-nautical mile (n.mi.) seaward zone, from 3 to 12
n.mi. offshore, and adjacent to the 3-n.mi. territorial
1
sea.
- Continental Margin
The edge of a continent; the zone between a continent
12
and the deep-sea ﬂoor of the abyssal plain.
- Continental Rise
Part of the continental margin; the ocean ﬂoor
from the continental slope to the abyssal plain. The
continental rise generally has a gentle slope and smooth
12
topography.
- Continental Shelf
Underwater portion (shelf) of the continent, with
moderate inclination, extending seaward from the shore
to the edge of the continental slope where the inclination
increases rapidly. Sometimes conventionally considered
as the continent margin between 0 and 200 meters
5
depths. (see Shelf Break)
- Continental Slope
Part of the continental margin; the ocean ﬂoor from
the continental shelf to the continental rise or oceanic
trench. Usually to a depth of about 200 meters. The
continental slope typically has a relatively steep grade
from 3 to 6 degrees.12
- Contingent Valuation
A method employing a hypothetical market to elicit
people’s preferences for a non-market good; typically
people are questioned about what they are willing to pay
or receive for speciﬁc increments or decrements in the
provision of the good.
- Control Date
Date established for deﬁning the pool of potential
participants in a given management program. Control
dates can establish a range of years during which a
potential participant must have been active in a ﬁshery
in order to qualify for quota share.13
- Control Rule
Describes a plan for pre-agreed management actions as
a function of variables related to the status of stock in
question. For example, a control rule can speciﬁc how
ﬁshing mortality or yield should vary with levels of
2
estimated biomass.
- Controlled Access
General term for management schemes that reduce
or restrict the number of participants in a ﬁshery. (see
Limited Entry)
8

- Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES)
A voluntary international agreement between
governments aimed at ensuring the international trade of
specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten
their survival.
- Convergence Zone
The line where two oceanic water masses meet, resulting
12
in the sinking of the denser one.
- Co-Occurring Stocks
Different stocks of ﬁsh that swim or school near one
1
another, and may be caught together.
- Coral Reef
The massive deposition of calcium carbonate by coral
polyps of colonial stony corals and other organisms
producing large living hard structures. Coral reefs can
12
range in size from a few feet to thousands of miles.
- Core Area
The central, most highly protected part of a protected
14
area. (see Marine Reserve, Protected Area)
- Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
1. A comparison of the economic beneﬁts and costs of
a project, policy, or regulation; 2. A comparison of the
economic beneﬁts of using a resource to the opportunity
cost if the resource is used. Projects or regulations are
typically evaluated based on how they change the costbeneﬁt ratio.
- Council
A regional ﬁsheries management council (FMC).
The Fishery Conservation and Management Act of
1976 as amended created eight regional councils
to prepare ﬁshery management plans (FMPs) and
FMP amendments for ﬁsheries in the U.S. Exclusive
8
Economic Zone (EEZ).
- Critical Areas
Areas within a Marine Protected Area (MPA) that are
crucial to achieving the objectives of the MPA; for
example, spawning areas in an MPA established for
14
ﬁsheries purposes. (see Marine Protected Area)
- Critical Size
The average size of a ﬁsh in a year class at the time
when the instantaneous rate of natural mortality equals
the instantaneous rate of growth in weight for the yearclass as a whole. At this size, the biomass of the age
class is maximized.5 (see Optimum Size)

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Crustaceans
A group of freshwater and saltwater invertebrates with
jointed legs and a hard shell of chitin. Includes shrimps,
2
crabs, lobsters, and crayﬁsh.
- Cultural Landscape
A cluster of beliefs, values, and norms about how places
14
and things on earth are related to human behavor.
- Culturally Aﬃliated
To be connected to a place, region, or resource because
it has signiﬁcant meaning to the culture of the individual
and his or her group. In most cases cultural afﬁliation
requires more than one generation to establish, and for
some groups the connections have been developed over
centuries. The Federal government uses the term in
various environmental laws and requlations.14
- Cumulative (Catch) Limit
The total allowable amount of a species or species
group, by weight, that a vessel may take and retain,
possess, or land during a period of time. Fishers may
take as many landings of a species or species complex
as they like as long as they do not exceed the cumulative
limit that applies to the vessel or permit during the
1
designated period.
- Cumulative (Catch) Limit Stacking
The association of cumulative limits with permits,
rather than with vessels, allowing a vessel with multiple
limited entry permits to harvest multiple cumulative
1
limits. Also known as permit stacking.
- Current
A horizontal movement of water.12
- Current System
Areas strongly inﬂuenced by large, unidirectional,
organized, coherent ﬂows of water in horizontal motion.
These include freshwater inﬂows and tidal ﬂows.
Geostrophic ﬂows are currents in the deep ocean that
ﬂow along lines of constant pressure or baroclinic
surfaces. Wind-driven currents along the shore, called
longshore currents, ﬂow parallel to the land and play a
role in sediment transport and structuring of the habitat.
Current systems play an especially important role by
governing productivity, providing transport for early-life
stages (e.g. eggs and larvae) and adults, and ﬂushing
pollutants out to sea.12 (see Primary Productivity,
Pollution)

JUNE 2006

D
- Decision Analysis
A formal analysis to aid decision-making in the face
of uncertainty. A decision analysis usually evaluates
the expected outcomes (e.g. average catch, constancy
of catch, probability of rebuilding to a given biomass
target, etc.) of alternative management controls.
A decision analysis can also address management
consequences under different plausible assumptions
about the status of the stock.5
- Decision Rule
Speciﬁcation of how pre-agreed management actions
will respond to perceived or estimated states of nature.5
- Decline
A decline is a reduction in the number of individuals,
or a decrease of the area of distribution, the causes of
which are either not known or not adequately controlled.
It need not necessarily still be continuing. Natural
ﬂuctuations will not normally count as part of a decline,
but an observed decline should not be considered part
of a natural ﬂuctuation unless there is evidence for this.
A decline that is the result of harvesting that reduces
the population to a planned level, not detrimental to the
survival of the species, is not covered by the term.5
- Dedicated Access Privileges (DAP)
Assigns an individual or other entity access to a predetermined portion of the annual catch in a particular
ﬁshery. In some cases, the privilege is transferable
and may be bought and sold, creating a market. The
term encompasses a range of tools, including access
privileges assigned to individuals (i.e. individual
transferable quotas [ITQs]), and to groups or
communities (e.g., community development quotas
15
[CDQs], cooperatives, and area-based quotas).
- Deep Shelf and Terrace
Horizontal habitat located from about 40 to 500 meters.
Insular habitats on or above the deep shelf consisting
of horizontal or nearly horizontal natural typographic
features interrupting a steeper slope and often occurring
in a series. These habitats extend seaward from the shelf
12
of an island or bank.
- Deep Slope
Vertical habitat located from about 40 to 500 meters.
Insular habitats on or above the deep slope characterized
by a steep (often vertical) slope extending seaward from
the shelf of an island or bank These habitats may be
colonized by some low-light coral and bryozoans.12
9

- Delta
A low, nearly ﬂat accumulation of sediment deposited at
the mouth of a river or stream, commonly triangular or
12
fan-shaped.
- Delta Method
Also known as the Taylor Series method, the Delta
method is a statistical procedure used to quantify the
uncertainty associated with estimates obtained from a
model. More speciﬁcally, the Delta method quantiﬁes
how the variance propagates from the parameters that
are estimated directly by the statistical model (e.g.
current spawning stock biomass, SSB), and those
parameters that are derived from the application of
mathematical formulations (e.g. future SSB based on
5
model projections).
- Demand Function
A function that relates the quantity of a good or service
demanded to price. It is usually an inverse relationship
where at higher (or lower) prices, less (or more) quantity
is consumed. Other factors which inﬂuence willingnessto-pay are incomes, tastes, preferences, and price of
9
substitutes.
- Demersal
Living in close relation with the bottom and depending
on it. Cods, groupers, crabs, and lobsters are demersal
resources. The term usually refers to the living mode of
5
the adult, i.e. demersal ﬁsh. (see Benthic, Pelagic)
- Demography
A term referring to the study of birth rates, death
rates, age distributions, and size of populations. It
is a fundamental discipline within the larger ﬁeld of
5
population biology and ecology. (see Population
Biology)
- Density-Dependence
The dependence of a factor inﬂuencing population
dynamics (such as survival rate or reproductive success)
on population density. The effect is usually in the
direction that contributes to the regulative capacity of a
5
stock.
- Density-Independent
External factors that inﬂuence all individuals of a
population, regardless of population density, such as
weather or climate.
- Depleted Stock
A stock driven by ﬁshing to very low level of abundance
compared to historical levels, with dramatically reduced
spawning biomass and reproductive capacity. It requires
particularly energetic rebuilding strategies and its
10

recovery time will depend on the present condition, the
5
level of protection, and the environmental conditions.
- Derby Fishery
A ﬁshery of brief duration during which ﬁshers race to
1
take as much catch as they can before the ﬁshery closes.
(see Olympic Fishing, Race-to-Fish)
- Deterministic
1. A deterministic process or model does not take
account or include any stochastic (random) variability.
The opposite is a stochastic model; 2. A model whose
behavior is fully speciﬁed by its form and parameters,
5
unlike a stochastic model. (see Simulation, Stochastic)
- Detritus
Dead organic matter and the decomposers that live on
it; when broken up by decomposers, detritus provides
energy to many coastal ecosystems.12
- Directed Fishery
Fishing that is directed at a certain species or group
of species. This applies to both sport and commercial
2
ﬁshing.
- Disappearance (Z)
A measure of the rate of decline in the numbers of
ﬁsh caught as individuals become less numerous or
available; often calculated from a catch curve.10
- Discard
To release or return ﬁsh to the sea, dead or alive,
whether or not such ﬁsh are brought fully on board a
5
ﬁshing vessel.
Comment: Estimates of discards can be made in a
variety of ways, including samples from observers and
logbook records. Fish (or parts of ﬁsh) can be discarded
for a variety of reasons such as having physical damage,
being a nontarget species for the trip, and compliance
with management regulations like minimum size limits
5
or quotas. (see Highgrading)
- Domestic Annual Harvest (DAH)
The domestic annual ﬁshing capacity, modiﬁed by other
factors (such as economic factors), which will determine
estimates of what the ﬂeets will harvest.1
- Domestic Annual Processing (DAP)
The amount that will be domestically processed, based
not only on physical capacity but on a demonstrated
intent and the effects of domestic harvesting, markets,
and other ﬁsheries.1

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Downwelling
Hydroform created by convergence of surface currents
that causes surface waters to sink, creating vertical and
horizontal displacement of water and possibly carrying
organisms to lower depths.12

the environment, and the processes that control its
8
dynamics. Humans are an integral part of an ecosystem.

- Ebb Tide
A falling tide, the phase of the tide between high water
and the succeeding low water.12

- Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF)
An approach to ﬁsheries management that strives
to balance diverse societal objectives by taking into
account the knowledge and uncertainties about biotic,
abiotic, and human components of ecosystems and
their interactions and applying an integrated approach
to ﬁsheries within ecologically meaningful boundaries.
The purpose of EAF is to plan, develop, and manage
ﬁsheries in a manner that addresses the multiple needs
and desires of society, without jeopardizing the options
for future generations to beneﬁt from the full range of
goods and services provided by marine ecosystems.5

- Ecological Reserve
Zoning that protects all living marine resources
through prohibitions on ﬁshing and on the removal or
14
disturbance of any living or nonliving resource. (see
Protected Area)

- Ecosystem Approach to Management (EAM)
Management that is adaptive, is speciﬁed
geographically, takes into account ecosystem knowledge
and uncertainties, considers multiple external inﬂuences,
and strives to balance diverse social objectives.8

- Economic Efficiency
1. A measure of the size of consumer surplus and
producer surplus. An increase in the combined surpluses
9
is an increase in economic efﬁciency ; 2. In commercial
ﬁshing, the point at which the added cost of producing a
unit of ﬁsh is equal to what buyers pay. Producing fewer
ﬁsh would bring the cost lower than what buyers are
paying. Producing more ﬁsh would raise the cost higher
than what buyers are paying. Harvesting at the point of
economic efﬁciency produces the maximum economic
yield (MEY).2

- Ecosystem Assessment
A social process through which the ﬁndings of science
concerning the causes of ecosystem change, their
consequences for human well-being, and management
and policy options are brought to bear on the needs of
5
decision makers.

E

- Economic Overﬁshing
A level of ﬁsh harvesting that is higher than that
of economic efﬁciency; harvesting more ﬁsh than
2
necessary to have maximum proﬁts for the ﬁshery.
- Economic Rent
The total amount of proﬁt that could be earned from a
ﬁshery owned by an individual after subtracting input
costs (usually capital and labor). Individual ownership
maximizes economic rent, but an open-entry policy
usually results in so many ﬁshermen that proﬁts higher
2
than the opportunity cost are driven to zero.
- Economic Value
The most people are willing to pay to use a given
quantity of a good or service; or, the smallest amount
people are willing to accept to forego the use of a given
5
quantity of a good or service.
- Ecosystem
A geographically speciﬁed system of organisms,
JUNE 2006

- Ecosystem Function
An intrinsic ecosystem characteristic related to the set
of conditions and processes whereby an ecosystem
maintains its integrity. Ecosystem functions include
such processes as decomposition, production, nutrient
cycling, and ﬂuxes of nutrients and energy.5
- Ecosystem Health
A measure of the stability and sustainability of
ecosystem functioning or ecosystem services that
depends on an ecosystem being active and maintaining
its organization, autonomy, and resilience over time.
Ecosystem health contributes to human well-being
through sustainable ecosystem services and conditions
5
for human health.
- Ecosystem-Based Management
An approach that takes major ecosystem components
and services—both structural and functional—into
account in managing ﬁsheries. It values habitat,
embraces a multispecies perspective, and is committed
to understanding ecosystem processes. Its goal is to
rebuild and sustain populations, species, biological
communities, and marine ecosystems at high levels
of productivity and biological diversity so as not to
jeopardize a wide range of goods and services from
11

marine ecosystems while providing food, revenue, and
5
recreation for humans.
- Ecosystem Properties
The size, biodiversity, stability, degree of organization,
and internal exchanges of materials and energy among
different pools, and other properties that characterize an
5
ecosystem.
- Ecosystem Services
Ecosystem services are the beneﬁts people obtain from
ecosystems. These include provisioning services, such
as food and water; regulating services, such as ﬂood
and disease control; cultural services, such as spiritual
and cultural beneﬁts; and supporting services, such as
nutrient cycling, that maintain the conditions for life on
Earth.5
- Ecotourism
Tourism involving travel to areas of natural or ecological
interest for non-consumptive purposes such as observing
wildlife or learning about the environment.
- Eﬀort
The amount of time and ﬁshing power used to harvest
10
ﬁsh; includes gear size, boat size, and horsepower. (see
Fishing Effort)
- Egg Survey
A systematic and scientiﬁc estimation of the abundance
of eggs (and larvae) in an area, through sampling at the
bottom or in the water column with appropriate devices
(e.g. small meshed midwater trawls, plankton nets).
Used to estimate the size of the spawning stock and the
importance of spawning.5
- Elasmobranch
Describes a group of ﬁsh without a hard bony skeleton,
including sharks, skates, and rays.5
- El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
Abnormally warm ocean climate conditions, which
in some years affect the west coast of Latin America
(centered on Peru) often around Christmas time. The
anomaly is accompanied by dramatic changes in coastal
upwelling, species abundance and distribution, higher
local rainfall and ﬂooding, and massive deaths of
ﬁsh and their predators (including birds). Many other
climatic anomalies around the world (e.g. droughts,
ﬂoods, forest ﬁres,) are attributed to consequences of El
Niño.5 (see La Niña, Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation)
- Emergency Action (EA)
A ﬁshery management council (FMC) may decide to
propose an EA when a problem arises in a ﬁshery that
12

requires regulations sooner than a ﬁshery management
plan amendment can be proposed and implemented.
Once implemented, an EA lasts for 90 days but can be
extended by the Secretary of Commerce at the council’s
request.
- Endangered Species
A species as deﬁned in the Endangered Species Act, that
is in danger of extinction through a signiﬁcant portion
of its range. A species classiﬁed as threatened is likely to
become an endangered species.
- Endangered Species Act (ESA)
The ESA is a statute which was enacted in 1973 to
conserve species and ecosystems. Under its auspices,
species facing possible extinction are listed as threatened
or endangered, or as candidate species for such listings.
When such a listing is made, recovery and conservation
plans are drawn up to ensure the protection of the
8
species and its habitat.
- Endemism
Of or relating to a native species or population
occurring under highly restricted conditions due to the
presence of a unique environmental factor that limits its
14
distribution.
- Endorsement
A designation on a limited entry permit that authorizes
the use of the permit for a particular gear, length of
vessel, or in a particular segment of the ﬁshery.1
- Environmental Assessment (EA)
As part of the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) process, an EA is a concise public document
that provides evidence and analysis for determining
whether to prepare an environmental impact statement
1
(EIS) or a ﬁnding of no signiﬁcant impact (FONSI).
- Environmental Ethics
A cluster of beliefs, values, and norms regarding how
14
humans should interact with the environment.
- Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
As part of the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) process, an EIS is an analysis of the expected
impacts resulting from a proposed Federal action (such
as ﬁsheries management or a development plan) on
the environment. An EIS is required for all ﬁshery
management plans as well as signiﬁcant amendments
to existing plans. The purpose of an EIS is to ensure
that the proposed Federal action gives appropriate
consideration to environmental values in order to
1
prevent harm to the environment.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
A Federal agency charged with enforcing numerous
environmental laws (including the Clean Water Act, the
Clean Air Act, and the State Drinking Water Act) and
supporting state and local governments in establishing
and enforcing environmental laws. In addition to
enforcement, the EPA researches causes, effects, and
remediation of environmental problems. All ﬁnal
environmental impact statements (EIS) are available
from the EPA.
- Epifauna
Benthic fauna living on the substrate but not burrowing
into it (as on a hard seaﬂoor) or living on other
organisms.12 (see Benthic)
- Equilibrium Catch
The catch (in numbers) taken from a ﬁsh stock when it
is in equilibrium with ﬁshing of a given intensity, and
(apart from the effects of environmental variation) its
abundance is not changing from one year to the next.6
- Equilibrium Yield (EY)
The yield in weight taken from a ﬁsh stock when it is in
equilibrium with ﬁshing of a given intensity, and (apart
from effects of environmental variation) its biomass
is not changing from one year to the next. Also called:
6
sustainable yield, equivalent sustainable yield.
- Escapement
The number or proportion of ﬁsh surviving (escaping
from) a given ﬁshery at the end of the ﬁshing season and
reaching the spawning grounds. The term is generally
1
used for salmon management.
- Essential Fish Habitat (EFH)
Congress deﬁned EFH as “those waters and substrate
necessary to ﬁsh for spawning, breeding, feeding, or
growth to maturity” (16 U.S.C. 1802(10)). The EFH
guidelines under 50 CFR 600.10 further interpret the
EFH deﬁnition as follows: Waters include aquatic areas
and their associated physical, chemical, and biological
properties that are used by ﬁsh and may include aquatic
areas historically used by ﬁsh where appropriate;
substrate includes sediment, hard bottom, structures
underlying the waters, and associated biological
communities; necessary means the habitat required to
support a sustainable ﬁshery and the managed species’
contribution to a healthy ecosystem; and “spawning,
breeding, feeding, or growth to maturity” covers a
species’ full life cycle.7
- EFH Assessment
An EFH assessment is a written assessment of the
effects of a proposed Federal action on EFH. Federal
JUNE 2006

agencies must provide the National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS) with an EFH assessment for any
action that may adversely affect EFH, except for
those activities covered by a general concurrence. An
EFH assessment must contain 1) a description of the
proposed action; 2) an analysis of the effects, including
cumulative effects, of the proposed action on EFH and
managed species; 3) the Federal agency’s conclusions
regarding the effects of the action on EFH; and 4)
proposed mitigation, if applicable. If appropriate, the
EFH assessment should also include the items listed at
50 CFR 600.920(e)(4). The level of detail in an EFH
assessment should be commensurate with the potential
7
impacts to EFH.
- EFH Consultation
An EFH consultation refers to the process of satisfying
the Federal agency consultation and response
requirements of section 305(b)(2) and 305(b)(4)(B) of
the Magnuson-Stevens Act, and the EFH conservation
recommendation requirement of section 305(b)(4)(A)
of that Act. When completed, an EFH consultation
generally consists of: 1) notiﬁcation to the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) of a Federal
action that may adversely affect EFH; 2) an EFH
assessment provided to NMFS; 3) EFH conservation
recommendations provided by NMFS to the Federal
action agency; and 4) the Federal agency’s response to
NMFS EFH conservation recommendations.7
- EFH Conservation Recommendation
EFH conservation recommendations are
recommendations provided by the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) to a Federal or state agency
pursuant to section 305(b)(4)(A) of the MagnusonStevens Act regarding measures that can be taken
by that agency to conserve EFH. EFH conservation
recommendations may be provided as part of an EFH
consultation with a Federal agency, or may be provided
by NMFS to any Federal or state agency whose actions
would adversely affect EFH (50 CFR 600.925).7
- Estimated Discard Mortality
Estimates of discards can be made in a variety of ways,
including samples from observers and logbook records.1
- Estuarine
1. Relating to, or formed in an estuary (e.g. estuarine
currents; estuarine animals); 2. Belonging to an estuary
(river mouth), an area in which sea water is appreciably
diluted by fresh water from rivers.5
- Estuary
A coastal ecological ecosystem that is partially enclosed,
receives freshwater input from land, and has a horizontal
13

fresh-salt salinity gradient; the average salinity of
estuarine waters is deﬁned as being 30 practical salinity
units (PSU) for at least 1 month per year.12
- Euryhaline
12
Organisms able to tolerate a wide range of salinity.
- Eutrophication
Generally, the natural or man-induced process by which
a body of water becomes enriched in dissolved mineral
nutrients (particularly phosphorus and nitrogen) that
stimulate the growth of aquatic plants and enhances
organic production of the water body. Excessive
enrichment may result in the depletion of dissolved
oxygen and eventually to species mortality.5
- Evolutionary Signiﬁcant Unit (ESU)
An ESU is a distinctive group of Paciﬁc salmon,
steelhead, or sea-run cutthroat trout that is uniquely
adapted to a particular area or environment and cannot
be replaced.1
- Excess Capacity
In the short-term, ﬁshing capacity that exceeds the
capacity required to capture and handle the allowable
catch. In the long-term, ﬁshing capacity that exceeds the
level required to ensuring the sustainability of the stock
and the ﬁshery at the desired level. Fishing capacity in
excess of what is required to reach the agreed catch or
effort objectives materialized by agreed target reference
points (e.g. MSY, F0.1, MEY, etc.).5
- Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
The EEZ is the area that extends from the seaward
boundaries of the coastal states (3 nautical miles (n.mi.)
in most cases, the exceptions are Texas, Puerto Rico
and the Gulf coast of Florida at 9 n.mi.) to 200 n.mi. off
the U.S. coast. Within this area the United States claims
and exercises sovereign rights and exclusive ﬁshery
management authority over all ﬁsh and all continental
shelf ﬁshery resources.8
- Executive Order 12866
A presidential Executive Order that, among other things,
requires Federal agencies to assess the economic costs
and beneﬁts of all regulatory proposals and complete
a regulatory impact analysis (RIA) that describes the
costs and beneﬁts of the proposed rule and alternative
approaches, and justiﬁes the chosen approach.1 (see
Regulatory Flexibility Act)
- Exempted Fishing Permit
A permit issued by NMFS that allows exemptions from
some ﬁshery regulations for testing, public display,
data collection, exploratory ﬁshing, health and safety,
14

environmental cleanup, and/or hazard removal purposes.
1
Previously known as an “experimental ﬁshing permit.”
- Existence Value
The economic value of knowing that a resource exists,
irrespective of the ability to use the resource now or in
the future.9 (see Heritage Value)
- Exploitable Biomass
Refers to that portion of a stock’s biomass that is
available to the ﬁshing gear.5
- Exploitation Pattern
The distribution of ﬁshing mortality over the age
composition of the ﬁsh population, determined by the
type of ﬁshing gear, area and seasonal distribution of
ﬁshing, and the growth and migration of the ﬁsh. The
pattern can be changed by modiﬁcations to ﬁshing
gear; for example, increasing mesh or hook size, or by
changing the ratio of harvest by gears exploiting the ﬁsh
(e.g. gillnet, trawl, hook and line, etc.).6
- Exploitation Rate
The proportion of a population at the beginning of a
given time period that is caught during that time period
(usually expressed on a yearly basis). For example,
if 720,000 ﬁsh were caught during the year from a
population of 1 million ﬁsh alive at the beginning of the
year, the annual exploitation rate would be 0.72.6
- Ex-Vessel
Refers to activities that occur when a commercial ﬁshing
boat lands or unloads a catch. For example, the price
received by a captain (at the point of landing) for the
catch is an ex-vessel price.5

F
- F-Ratio
The ratio of ﬁshing mortality on the oldest age group to
the ﬁshing mortality of the preceding age group. Annual
F-ratios are estimable parameters in many virtual
population analysis (VPA) assessments.5
- Factory Trawler
A large stern trawler equipped with plant for gutting,
ﬁlleting, freezing and storing ﬁsh, and for processing
ﬁsh oil and ﬁshmeal. Such vessels usually have
extensive superstructures.5

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Fathom
1.83 meters, equivalent to 6 feet.

schooling ﬁsh species underneath, thus increasing their
5
catchability.

- Fecundity
The potential reproductive capacity of an organism
or population expressed in the number of eggs (or
offspring) produced during each reproductive cycle.
Fecundity usually increases with age and size. The
information is used to compute spawning potential.5

- Fish Meal
Protein-rich meal derived from processing whole ﬁsh
(usually small pelagic ﬁsh, and ﬁshery bycatch) as well
as residues and byproducts from ﬁsh processing plants
(ﬁsh offal). Used mainly as agriculture feeds for poultry,
pigs, and aquaculture feeds for carnivorous aquatic
5
species.

- Federal Register (FR)
The Federal Register is the ofﬁcial daily publication for
rules, proposed rules, and notices of Federal agencies
and organizations, as well as executive orders and other
presidential documents. Fisheries regulations are not
considered ﬁnal until they are published in the Federal
Register.1 (see Rulemaking)
- Fillet
A slice of meat without bones, cut out for human
consumption.5
- Financial Analysis
Cost accounting based on market prices as opposed to
opportunity costs.9
- Financial Ratio
A method of evaluating a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial position. An
example is the “current ratio” which is equal to current
9
assets divided by current liabilities.
Finding of No Signiﬁcant Impact (FONSI)
As part of the National Environment Policy Act
(NEPA) process, a FONSI is a document that explains
why an action that is not otherwise excluded from the
NEPA process, and for which an environmental impact
statement (EIS) will not be prepared, will not have a
1
signiﬁcant effect on the human environment.
- Finﬁsh
Vertebrate and cartilanginous ﬁshery species, not
13
including crustaceans, cephalopds, or other mollusks.
- Finning
The practice of removing ﬁns and discarding the carcass,
5
usually pertaining to sharks.
- Fish
Used as a collective term, includes mollusks,
5
crustaceans and any aquatic animal which is harvested.
- Fish Aggregating Device (FAD)
Artiﬁcial or natural ﬂoating objects placed on the ocean
surface, often anchored to the bottom, to attract several

JUNE 2006

- Fish Stock
The living resources in the community or population
from which catches are taken in a ﬁshery. Use of the
term ﬁsh stock usually implies that the particular
population is more or less isolated from other stocks
of the same species and hence self-sustaining. In a
particular ﬁshery, the ﬁsh stock may be one or several
species of ﬁsh but here is also intended to include
5
commercial invertebrates and plants.
- Fisher
A gender-neutral name for a person (male or female)
5
participating in a ﬁshery.
- Fisheries Management
The integrated process of information gathering,
analysis, planning, decision making, allocation of
resources, and formulation and enforcement of ﬁshery
regulations by which the ﬁsheries management
authority controls the present and future behaviors of
the interested parties in the ﬁshery in order to ensure the
continued productivity of the living resources.5
- Fisheries Management Authority
The body which makes the decisions on how the
ﬁshery is carried out, and is responsible for all ancillary
services, such as statistics gathering, assessment,
monitoring, control and surveillance, consultation with
ﬁshers and other users of the sea, and resource allocation
or determining the conditions of access to the ﬁshery.5
- Fisheries Management Organization
Institution responsible for ﬁsheries management,
including the formulation of the rules that govern ﬁshing
activities. The ﬁshery management organization, and
its subsidiary bodies, may also be responsible for all
ancillary services, such as the collection of information,
its analysis, stock assessment, monitoring, control
and surveillance, consultation with interested parties,
application and/or determination of the rules of access to
the ﬁshery, and resource allocation. Also called: ﬁshery
management arrangement.5

15

- Fishery
1. Generally, a ﬁshery is an activity leading to harvesting
of ﬁsh. It may involve capture of wild ﬁsh or raising
of ﬁsh through aquaculture; 2. A unit determined by an
authority or other entity that is engaged in raising or
harvesting ﬁsh. Typically, the unit is deﬁned in terms of
some or all of the following: people involved, species or
type of ﬁsh, area of water or seabed, method of ﬁshing,
class of boats, and purpose of the activities;5 3. The
combination of ﬁsh and ﬁshers in a region, the latter
ﬁshing for similar or the same species with similar or the
12
same gear types.
- Fishery Conservation and Management Act (FCMA)
The Fishery Conservation and Management Act of
1976 is the Federal law that created the regional ﬁshery
management councils and is the Federal government’s
basis for ﬁsheries management in the U.S. Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ). It has been reauthorized a
number of times and was renamed the MagnusonStevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act
(Magnuson-Stevens Act) in honor of the late Washington
Senator, Warren G. Magnuson, in 1980, and in 1996,
added Alaska Senator Ted Stevens.
- Fishery
The combination of ﬁsh and ﬁshers in a region, the later
ﬁshing for similar or the same species with similar or the
same gear types.12
- Fishery Conservation Zone (FCZ)
The FCZ is the area from the seaward limit of state
waters out to 200 nautical miles. Since 1981, it is
referred to as the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).
- Fishery-Dependent
Data collected directly on a ﬁsh or ﬁshery from
commercial or sport ﬁshermen and seafood dealers.
Common methods include logbooks, trip tickets, port
2
sampling, ﬁshery observers, and phone surveys. (see
Fishery-Independent)
- Fishery Economic Assessment Model (FEAM)
FEAM uses historical landings data, information
on industry cost and margin structure (vessels and
processors), and income multipliers generated by IMpact
analysis for PLANing (IMPLAN), a regional economic
impact model, to produce estimates of “regionalized”
local income impact after deducting for leakage of
payments to nonresidents and to non-local suppliers,
wholesalers, and manufacturers.1
- Fishery-Independent
Characteristic of information (e.g. stock abundance

16

index) or an activity (e.g. research vessel survey)
obtained or undertaken independently of the activity of
the ﬁshing sector. Intended to avoid the biases inherent
5
to ﬁshery-related data. (see Fishery-Dependent)
- Fishery Management Council (FMC)
A regional ﬁsheries management body established by the
Magnuson-Stevens Act to manage ﬁshery resources in
eight designated regions of the United States.1
Comment: “Council membership is a balance of
commercial and recreational ﬁsherman, marine scientists
and state and Federal ﬁsheries managers, who combine
their knowledge to prepare ﬁshery management plans
(FMPs) for stocks of ﬁnﬁsh, shellﬁsh and crustaceans.
In developing these FMPs the councils use the most
recent scientiﬁc assessments of the ecosystems involved
with special consideration of the requirements of marine
mammals, sea turtles and other protected resources.”
[Magnuson-Stevens Act]
- Fishery Management Plan (FMP)
1. A document prepared under supervision of the
appropriate ﬁshery management council (FMC)
for management of stocks of ﬁsh judged to be in
need of management. The plan must generally be
formally approved. An FMP includes data, analyses,
5
and management measures ; 2. A plan containing
conservation and management measures for ﬁshery
resources, and other provisions required by the
Magnuson-Stevens Act, developed by ﬁshery
3
management councils or the Secretary of Commerce.
- Fishery Management Unit (FMU)
A ﬁshery or a portion of a ﬁshery identiﬁed in a
ﬁshery management plan (FMP) relevant to the FMP’s
management objectives. The choice of stocks or species
in an FMU depends upon the focus of FMP objectives,
and may be organized around biological, geographic,
5
economic, technical, social, or ecological perspectives.
- Fishery Models
Simpliﬁed representations of the ﬁsheries complex
reality. May or may not be a mathematical
representation.5 (see Simulation)
- Fishery Policy
Measures by which a national government, regional
or state authority, attempts to inﬂuence or control the
behavior of individuals, companies, and communities
in the ﬁsheries sector to achieve certain objectives.
The measures can be of varied kinds including ﬁscal
measures, (e.g. taxes, subsidies, public investments,
etc.); trade measures (e.g. import and export duties;

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

quotas); social measures (health and education services);
regulations (i.e. on food quality; means and types of ﬁsh
harvesting; individual transferable quotas); and others.5

operators, crew, recreational ﬁshers, ﬁsh processors,
gear supplies, and others in the community who depend
on ﬁshing.1

- Fishery Reserve
Zoning that precludes ﬁshing activity on some or all
species to protect critical habitat, rebuild stocks (long
term, but not necessarily permanent closure), provide
insurance against overﬁshing, or enhance ﬁshery yield.14

- Fishing Eﬀort
The amount of ﬁshing gear of a speciﬁc type used on
the ﬁshing grounds over a given unit of time (e.g. hours
trawled per day, number of hooks set per day, or number
of hauls of a beach seine per day). When two or more
kinds of gear are used, the respective efforts must be
adjusted to some standard type before being added.
5
Sometimes referred to as effective ﬁshing effort.

- Fishery Resource
In general, refers to elements of a natural aquatic
resource (e.g. strains, species, populations, stocks,
assemblages that can be legally caught by ﬁshing). May
sometimes be taken as including also the habitat of such
5
resources.
- Fishery Technology
The equipment and practices for ﬁnding, harvesting,
handling, processing, and distributing aquatic resources
and their products.5
- Fishing
Any activity, other than scientiﬁc research conducted by
a scientiﬁc research vessel, that involves the catching,
taking, or harvesting of ﬁsh; or any attempt to do so; or
any activity that can reasonably be expected to result
in the catching, taking, or harvesting of ﬁsh and any
operations at sea in support of it.5
- Fishing Capacity
1. The ability of a stock of inputs (capital) to produce
output (measured as either effort or catch); 2. The
maximum amount of ﬁsh over a period of time (year,
season) that can be produced by a vessel or ﬂeet of
vessels if fully utilized, given the biomass and age
structure of the ﬁsh stock and the present state of the
technology. The “ﬁshing ﬂeet” is the stock of inputs (i.e.
physical capital and human capital). The term “fully
utilized” is used in a precautionary context in that it
assumes that capacity utilization is 100 percent; 3. The
quantity of ﬁsh that can be taken by a ﬁshing unit, for
example an individual, community, vessel, or ﬂeet,
assuming that there is no limitation on the yield from
the stock, usually expressed in terms of some measure
of vessel size, such as gross tonnage, hold capacity,
horsepower. Reﬂects potential rather than nominal
5
ﬁshing effort.
- Fishing Community
A community that is substantially dependent on or
substantially engaged in the harvest or processing of
ﬁshery resources to meet social and economic needs.
Includes ﬁshing vessel owners, ﬁshing families,

JUNE 2006

Comment: The effort may be nominal, reﬂecting the
simple total of effort units exerted on a stock in a given
time period. It may also be standard or effective when
corrected to take account of differences in ﬁshing
power and efﬁciency and ensure direct proportionality
with ﬁshing mortality. Relates usually to a speciﬁc
ﬁshery and gear. If more than one gear is considered,
standardization in relation to one of them is necessary.
For biologists, a good measure of ﬁshing effort should
be proportional to ﬁshing mortality. For economists it
5
should be proportional to the cost of ﬁshing.
- Fishing Gear
The equipment used for ﬁshing (e.g. gillnet, hand line,
harpoon, haul seine, long line, bottom and midwater
trawls, purse seine, rod-and-reel, pots and traps). Each
5
of these gears can have multiple conﬁgurations.
- Fishing Intensity
1. In general, and mainly for trawling, the ﬁshing effort
exerted per unit of areas (e.g. in hours of trawling per
100 square miles). In stock assessment theory, the
effective (or standard) ﬁshing effort per unit area must
be proportional to ﬁshing mortality through the relation
F = q(f/A) where (f/A) is the ﬁshing intensity, and q is
the catchability coefﬁcient; 2. Effective ﬁshing effort; 3.
5
Fishing effort per unit area; 4. Effectiveness of ﬁshing.
- Fishing Mortality (F)
1. F stands for the ﬁshing mortality rate in a particular
stock. It is roughly the proportion of the ﬁshable stock
that is caught in a year5; 2. A measurement of the rate of
removal from a population by ﬁshing. Fishing mortality
can be reported as either annual or instantaneous.
Annual mortality is the percentage of ﬁsh dying in one
year. Instantaneous mortality is that percentage of ﬁsh
2
dying at any one time.
F0.1
The ﬁshing mortality rate which the increase in yield per
recruit in weight for an increase in a unit of effort is only

17

10 percent of the yield per recruit produced by the ﬁrst
unit of effort on the unexploited stock (i.e. the slope of
the yield-per-recruit curve for the F0.1 rate is only one6
tenth the slope of the curve at its origin).
F10%
The ﬁshing mortality rate that reduces the spawning
stock biomass per recruit (SSB/R) to 10% of the amount
present in the absence of ﬁshing.3
- FHIGH
Fishing mortality rate corresponding to an equilibrium
spawning potential ratio equal to the inverse of the 90th
11
percentile observed survival ratio.
- FLOW
Fishing mortality rate corresponding to an equilibrium
th
spawning potential ratio equal to the inverse of the 10
percentile observed survival ratio.11
- FMED
Fishing mortality rate corresponding to an equilibrium
Spawning Potential Ratio equal to the inverse of the
11
median observed survival ratio.
- fMSY
Effective ﬁshing effort corresponding to FMSY.11
- FMSY
The ﬁshing mortality rate that, if applied constantly,
would result in maximum sustainable yield (MSY).
Used as a biological reference point, FMSY is the implicit
ﬁshing mortality target of many regional and national
ﬁshery management authorities and organizations. FMSY
can be estimated in two ways: a) from simple biomassaggregated production models; b) from age-structured
models that include a stock-recruitment relationship.5
- FMAX
1. The level of ﬁshing mortality (rate of removal by
ﬁshing) that produces the greatest yield from the
2
ﬁshery ; 2. A biological reference point. It is the
ﬁshing mortality rate that maximizes equilibrium yield
per recruit. FMAX is the F level often used to deﬁne
growth overﬁshing. In general, FMAX is different (and
higher) than FMSY depending on the stock-recruitment
relationship. By deﬁnition, FMAX is always higher than
5
F0.1.
- Fτ (also FEXTINCTION, FCRASH)
Fishing mortality rate corresponding to an equilibrium
spawning potential ratio equal to the inverse of the
survival ratio at the origin of the stock-recruitment
relationship. A stock ﬁshed at or above this level for a
prolonged period of time is expected to collapse.11
18

- FX%
Fishing mortality rate that results in x% equilibrium
spawning potential ratio.11
- Fishing Power
1. The catch which a particular gear or vessel takes from
a given density of ﬁsh during a certain time interval.
For example, larger vessels (horsepower) have a greater
ability to catch more ﬁsh, thus the greater their ﬁshing
power. Also, improvements in a vessel or gear, such
as ﬁsh ﬁnders, global positioning systems, etc., can
3
increase ﬁshing power ; 2. Of a boat, or of a ﬁshing
gear: The relative vulnerability of the stock to different
boats or gears. Usually determined as the catch taken by
the given apparatus, divided by the catch of a standard
5
apparatus ﬁshing at nearly the same time and place. (see
Standardization)
Comment: In such a deﬁnition, ﬁshing power is not
measured in absolute terms and is dependent on stock
size. For this reason, in practice, ﬁshing power is
5
measured only in relative terms.
- Fixed Costs
Costs that do not vary with output. Fixed costs can only
5
be avoided if the ﬁrm goes out of business.
- Fixed Gear
Fishing gear that is stationary after it is deployed (unlike
trawl or troll gear which is moving when it is actively
ﬁshing). Fixed gear includes gillnets, long lines, pots,
traps, and any other gear that is anchored at least at one
end.1
- Fjord
An estuary with a seaward sill that is formed in a deep
valley created by a retreating glacier.12
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
United Nations organization founded in 1945 with a
mandate to raise levels of nutrition and standards of
living, to improve agricultural productivity, and to better
the condition of rural populations. FAO is active in land
and water development, plant and animal production,
forestry, ﬁsheries, economic and social policy,
investment nutrition, food standards, and commodities
and trade.13
- Food Chain
The transfer of energy from the source in plants
through a series of organisms with repeated eating and
being eaten. At each transfer, a large proportion of the
potential energy is lost as heat. The shorter the food
chain (or the nearest the organism is from the beginning
of the food chain), the greater the available energy
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

which can be converted in biomass.5 (see Predator-Prey
Relationship, Trophic Level)
- Food Security
Freedom from hunger. The capability to produce an
adequate amount of food for all consumers at affordable
prices.5
- Footrope
The rope along the bottom of a trawl net’s opening. Small
footropes can get caught or tangled in rocky reef areas, so
regulations that require small footropes protect these rocky
areas by encouraging ﬁshermen to ﬁsh elsewhere.
- Forage Species
Species used as prey by a larger predator for its food.
Includes small schooling ﬁshes such as anchovies,
sardines, herrings, capelin, smelts, and menhaden, and
invertebrates such as squid.5
- Fork Length
A measurement used frequently for ﬁsh length when
the tail has a fork shape. Projected straight distance
5
between the tip of the snout and the fork of the tail.
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Federal statute enacted in 1996 giving members of the
public the right to request access to Executive Branch
records for inspection or copying.
- Front
In oceanographic terms, a region of sharp gradient in
temperature or salinity, indicating a transition between
two current systems or water masses. Intersection
between the thermocline (temperature discontinuity) or
halocline (salinity discontinuity) and the surface. Fronts
are usually associated with high biological activity, high
abundance of highly migratory resources (e.g. tunas),
and are actively sought as ﬁshing areas. Fronts can be
5
monitored by satellite remote-sensing.
- Fully Exploited
Term used to qualify a stock which is probably
neither being overexploited nor underexploited and is
producing, on average, close to its maximum sustainable
yield (MSY). This situation would correspond to ﬁshing
at FMSY (in a classical production model relating yield to
effort) or FMAX (in a model relating yield-per-recruit to
ﬁshing mortality).5

G
- Gastropods
Snails and other mollusks (e.g. abalone, Queen conch,
and cones) that typically possess a coiled dorsal shell
12
and a ventral creeping foot.
- Gear
A ﬁshing gear is a tool used to catch ﬁsh, such as hook5
and-line, trawl net, gillnet, pot, trap, spear, etc.
- Gear Conﬂict
Conﬂicts between ﬁshing gear on ﬁshing grounds where
one type of gear interferes with another type of gear. An
example is where mobile trawling gear damages passive
5
gear, such as lobster traps.
- Gear Restriction
1. A type of input control used as a management tool
whereby the amount and/or type of ﬁshing gear used
by ﬁshers in a particular ﬁshery is restricted by law5;
2. Limits placed on the type, amount, number, or
techniques allowed for a given type of ﬁshing gear.13
- General Linear Model (GLM)
1. A mathematical formula (model) that relates one
biological factor to another. Once a mathematical
relationship is established, scientists use the model
to predict one factor over another2; 2. A statistical
procedure similar to an analysis of variance or a multiple
regression that is used to estimate the magnitude of
the effects of different factors on a variable of interest.
GLM’s are the tool of choice for standardizing catch
per unit effort (CPUE) data in order to obtain indices of
abundance. In such applications, the variable of interest
is CPUE and the factors are year and perhaps others
such as area, gear conﬁguration, etc.; the standardized
abundance index of annual abundance would then be
given by the parameters associated with the factor, year.5
- Generation Time
In the context of the National Standard Guidelines,
generation time is a measure of the time required for
a female to produce a reproductively-active female
offspring for use in setting maximum allowable
3
rebuilding time periods. (see National Standard
Guidelines)
- Genetically Modiﬁed Organism
An organism in which humans by means of gene or cell
technologies have altered the genetic material. These
include the isolation, characterization, and modiﬁcation
of genes and their introduction into living cells or

JUNE 2006

19

viruses of DNA, as well as techniques for the production
of living cells with new combinations of genetic material
by the fusion of two or more cells.5
- Geographic Information System (GIS)
A computer system for storage, analysis, and retrieval
of information in which all data are spatially referenced
by their geographic coordinates (latitude, longitude).
In addition to primary data, such as climatic and soil
characteristics, a GIS can be used to calculate derived
values such as erosion hazard, forest yield class, or land
suitability for speciﬁed land-use types. Data are usually
derived from maps, and derived values can be printed
5
out as maps.
- Geographic Region
With regard to biogeography and species distribution, a
region which is separated from an adjacent region by a
barrier which is usually impenetrable to many species,
limiting their movement or preventing establishment
outside their natural geographic range.5
- Geothermal Vent
Submerged geoform consisting of a vent of hot, mineralrich water on the ocean ﬂoor, generally located on or
near spreading oceanic ridges or on the continental
margins of subduction trenches.12
- Ghost Fishing
The accidental capture of aquatic organisms by ﬁshing
gear (usually gillnets, or traps, pots, etc.) that has been
lost or discarded into the sea and which continues to
entangle or trap aquatic animals.5
- Gillnet
With this type of gear, the ﬁsh are gilled, entangled or
enmeshed in the netting. These nets can be used either
alone or, as is more usual, in large numbers placed in
line. According to their design, ballasting and buoyancy,
these nets may be used to ﬁsh on the surface, in
midwater or on the bottom.5
- Global Positioning System (GPS)
A low cost ($1,000 to $5,000) electronic receiving
system for ﬁnding three-dimensional coordinates on the
5
earth using satellites.
- Gonadosomatic Index (GSI)
A ratio of the weight of a ﬁsh’s eggs or sperm to its
body weight, used to determine the spawning time of a
species of ﬁsh.10
- Goods and Services
Any commodities or nonmaterial goods (services) such
as assistance or accommodations that yield positive
5
utility.
20

- Governance
1. In a particular sector (e.g. ﬁsheries), a continuing
process through which governments, institutions, and
stakeholders of the sector and of other interacting
sectors elaborate and adopt appropriate policies, plans,
and management strategies to ensure sustainable
and responsible resource utilization. In the process,
conﬂicting or diverse interests may be accommodated
and cooperative action may be taken; 2. The formal
and informal arrangements, institutions, and mores
which determine how resources or an environment are
utilized, how problems and opportunities are evaluated
and analyzed, what behavior is deemed acceptable or
forbidden, and what rules and sanctions are applied to
affect the pattern of resource and environmental use.5
- Gross Economic Beneﬁts
Positive utility gained from the use of a resource prior to
netting the costs. (see Net Economic Beneﬁts)
- Gross Register Ton (GRT)
A unit of internal volume of a ship, equal to 100 cubic
feet. GRT is the total volume or capacity of a vessel.13
- Groundﬁsh
Collective term loosely applied to most commercially
harvested marine ﬁsh other than salmonids, scombrids,
and clupeids. Although many groundﬁsh are demersal
(e.g. yellowtail ﬂounder, yellowﬁn sole), other species
are semidemersal or pelagic (e.g. pollock, cod,
haddock).13 (see Demersal)
- Growth
Usually an individual ﬁsh’s increase in length or weight
with time. Also may refer to the increase in numbers of
2
ﬁsh in a population with time.
- Growth Model
1. A mathematical formula that describes the increase
2
in length or weight of an individual ﬁsh with time ; 2.
A mathematical description or representation of the
size of a living organism at its various ages. The von
Bertalanffy growth model is commonly used in ﬁsh
5
stock assessments.
- Growth Overﬁshing
1. The situation existing when the rate of ﬁshing is
above FMAX and when ﬁsh are harvested before their
growth potential is fully reached3; 2. When ﬁshing
pressure on smaller ﬁsh is too heavy to allow the ﬁshery
to produce its maximum poundage. Growth overﬁshing,
by itself, does not affect the ability of a ﬁsh population
to replace itself.2

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Growth Rate (K)
1. Annual or seasonal. The increase in weight of a ﬁsh
per year (or season), divided by the initial weight; 2. In
ﬁsh this is often measured in terms of the parameter K
of the von Bertalanffy curve for the mean weight as a
5
function of age.
- Guyot
Submerged earthform at depths >200 meters consisting
of a ﬂat-topped seamount with a cap of the carbonate
remains of a drowned atoll.12
- Gyre
Large cyclonic current that moves water in a circular
pattern from the tropics to the polar seas.12

H
- Habitat
1. The environment in which the ﬁsh live, including
everything that surrounds and affects its life, e.g. water
quality, bottom, vegetation, associated species (including food supplies); 2. The locality, site and particular
5
type of local environment occupied by an organism.
- Habitat Area(s) of Particular Concern (HAPC)
Subsets of essential ﬁsh habitat that serve an important
ecological function, are particularly sensitive to humaninduced environmental degradation, are particularly
stressed by human development activities, or comprise a
rare habitat type.2
- Hadal Zone
Deepest deep bottom area or portion of submerged
geoform at depths >7,000 meters.12
- Halophytic
12
Salt-tolerant vegetation.
- Harvest
The total number or weight of ﬁsh caught and kept from
an area over a period of time. Note that landings, catch,
and harvest are different.2
- Harvest Control Rule
Describes how harvest is intended to be controlled by
management in relation to the state of some indicator
of stock status. For example, a harvest control rule can
describe the various values of ﬁshing mortality that will
be aimed at for various values of the stock abundance.
It formalizes and summarizes a management strategy.
JUNE 2006

Constant catch and constant ﬁshing mortality are two
5
types of simple harvest control rules.
- Harvest Guideline
A numerical harvest level that is a general objective, but
not a quota. Attainment of a harvest guideline does not
require a management response, but does prompt review
1
of a ﬁshery.
- Harvest Speciﬁcations
The detailed regulations that make up management
measures; for example, trawl footrope size, depth limits,
net mesh-size, etc.1
- Harvesting Capacity
The capacity of the ﬁshing ﬂeet to harvest ﬁsh, usually
expressed in terms of some measure of vessel size, such
5
as gross tonnage, hold capacity, horsepower.
- Head Boat
A ﬁshing boat that takes recreational (sport) ﬁshermen
out for a fee per person. Different from a charter boat
in that people on a head boat pay individual fees as
2
opposed to renting the boat. (see Party Boat)
- Head Rope
The length of rope or wire in a trawl to which the top
5
wings and cover netting are attached.
- Health
The condition of the marine environment from the
perspective of adverse effects caused by anthropogenic
(human) activities, in particular habitat destruction,
changed sedimentation rates and the mobilization of
contaminants. Such condition refers to the contemporary
state of the ocean, prevailing trends, and the prognosis
for improvement or deterioration of its quality.5
- Heritage Value
Site possessing historical, archaeological, architectural,
technological, aesthetic, scientiﬁc, spiritual, social,
traditional, or other special cultural signiﬁcance
associated with human activity.14
- Highgrading
Form of selective sorting of ﬁsh in which higher value,
more marketable ﬁsh are retained and ﬁsh that could be
13
legally retained, but are less marketable, are discarded.
(see Discard)
- High Seas
All waters beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
(>200 nautical miles) of the United States and beyond
1
any foreign nation’s EEZ.

21

- High Seas Resources
Resources distributed exclusively in the high seas, i.e. in
waters beyond the areas of national jurisdiction (which
can be 200 nautical miles or less) excluding species
ﬁxed on the continental shelf which remain under the
5
sovereign rights of the coastal states.

- Incidental Take
The “take” of protected species (such as listed salmon,
marine mammals, sea turtles, or sea birds) during
ﬁshing. “Take” is deﬁned as to harass, harm, pursue,
hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect, or to
1
attempt to engage in any such conduct.

- Highly Migratory Species
Marine species whose life cycle includes lengthy
migrations, usually through the exclusive economic
zones of two or more countries as well as into
international waters. This term usually is used to denote
tuna and tuna-like species, sharks, swordﬁsh, and
5
billﬁsh.

- Index of Abundance
A relative measure of the abundance of a stock; for
5
example, a time series of catch per unit effort data.

- Hook and Line
A type of ﬁshing gear consisting of a hook tied to a line.
Fish are attracted by natural bait that is placed on the
hook, and are impaled by the hook when biting the bait.
Artiﬁcial bait (lures) with hooks are often used. Hookand-line units may be used singly or in large numbers.5
- Household
All the persons, kin and non-kin, who live in the
same dwelling and share income, expenses, and daily
subsistence tasks. A basic unit for sociocultural and
economic analysis, a household may consist of persons
(sometimes one but generally two or more) living
together and jointly making provision for food or other
5
essentials elements of livelihood.
- Hydrothermal Vent
A place on the seaﬂoor, generally associated with
spreading centers, where warm to super-hot, mineralrich water is released; may support a diverse community
12
of organisms.

- Indigenous Fishing
Fishing undertaken by peoples native to a land or
region.5
- Indirect Methods
Methods for stock assessment based on ﬁsherydependent data, such as catch and effort statistics and
5
age structure of the catch.

- Hypersaline
Extremely salty, having much more salt than normal
seawater.

- Individual Fishing Quota (IFQ)
A type of limited entry, an allocation to an individual (a
person or a legal entity, e.g. a vessel owner or company)
of a right [privilege] to harvest a certain amount of ﬁsh
in a certain period of time. It is also often expressed
as an individual share of an aggregate quota, or total
5
allowable catch (TAC).

I

- Individual Transferable Quota (ITQ)
A type of individual ﬁshing quota (IFQ) allocated
to individual ﬁshermen or vessel owners that can be
transferred (sold or leased) to others.1,5

- Ichthyoplankton
Fish eggs and larvae belonging to the planktonic
5
community.
- Incidental Catch
Retained or discarded nontarget species caught when
ﬁshing for the primary purpose of catching a different
species.1,5
22

- Indicators
1. A variable, pointer, or index. Its ﬂuctuation reveals
the variations in key elements of a system. The position
and trend of the indicator in relation to reference points
or values indicate the present state and dynamics of the
system. Indicators provide a bridge between objectives
and action; 2. Signals of processes, inputs, outputs,
effects, results, outcomes, impacts, etc., that enable such
phenomena to be judged or measured. Both qualitative
and quantitative indicators are needed for management
learning, policy review, monitoring, and evaluation;
3. In biology, an organism, species, or community
whose characteristics show the presence of speciﬁc
environmental conditions, good or bad.5

- Industrial Fishery
A ﬁshery for species not directly used for human food,
e.g. Atlantic menhaden ﬁshery.2
- Infauna
Benthic fauna living in the substrate and especially in
the soft seaﬂoor.12
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Information Management
1. A mechanism and structured set of processes, people,
and equipment for converting data into information and
storing and distributing information; 2. A mechanism
for storing, generating and distributing information for
supporting operations and management functions of an
organization(s).5
- Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis
1
An analysis required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
- Input Controls
Management instruments used to control the time and
place as well as type and/or amount of ﬁshing with the
view to limit yields and ﬁshing mortality; for example,
restrictions on type and quantity of gear, effort, and
capacity; closed seasons.5
- Input-Output Analysis
A systematic method that both describes the ﬁnancial
linkages and network of input supplies and production
which connect industries in a regional economy
(however deﬁned), and predicts the changes in regional
output, income, and employment. Input-output analysis
generally focuses on economic activity and the selfsufﬁciency of an economy, unlike cost-beneﬁt analysis
which focuses on changes in net national beneﬁts from
9
use of a productive resource.
- In-Season Adjustments
Regulatory changes that affect an ongoing ﬁshery.1
- Inshore Waters
5
Waters of the shallower part of the continental shelf.
- Instantaneous Rate of Fishing Mortality (F)
When ﬁshing and natural mortality act concurrently, F is
equal to the instantaneous total mortality rate, multiplied
by the ratio of ﬁshing deaths to all deaths. Also called:
5
rate of ﬁshing; instantaneous rate of ﬁshing.
- Instantaneous Rate of Growth (G)
The natural logarithm of the ratio of ﬁnal weight to
initial weight of a ﬁsh in a unit of time, usually a year.
When applied collectively to all ﬁsh of a given age in
a stock, the possibility of selective mortality must be
considered. 5
- Instantaneous Rate of Mortality (Z)
When ﬁshing and natural mortality act concurrently,
the natural logarithm of the survival rate (with sign
changed) for deaths due to either natural causes
(instantaneous rate of natural mortality, M) or due to
ﬁshing mortality (instantaneous rate of ﬁshing mortality,
F). The instantaneous rate of total mortality, Z, is the
JUNE 2006

sum of these two rates: Z = F + M, also called the
5
coefﬁcient of decrease.
Comment: Usually given on a yearly basis; the
ﬁgure just described is divided by the fraction of a
year represented by the “short interval” in question.
This concept is used principally when the size of the
vulnerable stock is not changing or is changing only
slowly, since among ﬁshes recruitment is not usually
associated with stock size in the direct way in which
mortality and growth are.5
- Instantaneous Rate of Recruitment
Number of ﬁsh that grow to catchable size per short
interval of time, divided by the number of catchable ﬁsh
already present at that time. Usually given on a yearly
basis; that is, the ﬁgure just described is divided by the
fraction of a year represented by the “short interval” in
question. This concept is used principally when the size
of the vulnerable stock is not changing or is changing
only slowly, since among ﬁshes recruitment is not
usually associated with stock size in the direct way in
which mortality and growth are.6
- Instantaneous Rate of Surplus Production
Equal to rate of growth plus rate of recruitment less
rate of natural mortality—all in terms of weight and on
an instantaneous basis. In a “balanced” or equilibrium
ﬁshery, this increment replaces what is removed by
ﬁshing, and rate of surplus production is numerically
equal to rate of ﬁshing. Also called instantaneous rate of
5
natural increase.
- Integrated Analysis
Refers to stock assessment methodologies that attempt
to integrate multiple sources of data into a single
estimation framework. For example, an integrated
assessment can attempt to ﬁt the following observations
based on model predictions: total landings by ﬂeet, size
samples of landings, discard estimates, size samples
of discards, standardized catch per unit effort by ﬂeet,
ﬁshery-independent surveys, and tagging records on
movement, growth, and recoveries.5
- Integrated Management
An approach by which the many competing
environmental and socioeconomic issues are considered
together, with the aim of achieving the optimal solution
from the viewpoint of the whole community and the
14
whole ecosystem.
- Interstate Marine Fisheries Commissions
Non-regulatory agencies that serve multiple states
(Paciﬁc States: Alaska, California, Idaho, Oregon, and
Washington; Atlantic States: Maine, New Hampshire,
23

Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and
Florida; Gulf States: Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi,
Alabama, and Florida) and as a mechanism for Federal
funding of regional ﬁshery projects. Interstate marine
ﬁsheries commissions provide a communication
exchange between individual ﬁshery management
councils and information in the form of data services for
1
various ﬁsheries.
- Intertidal Zone
The area on a seacoast between the highest and lowest
12
tide. (see Littoral Zone)
- Intrinsic Growth Rate (r)
A value that quantiﬁes how much a population can grow
between successive time periods. The intrinsic growth
rate is often estimated with production models and plays
an important role in evaluating the sustainability of
different harvest levels and the capacity to recover after
5
depletion.
- Intrinsic Rate of Increase (z)
The change in the amount of harvestable stock,
estimated by recruitment increases plus growth minus
natural mortality.10
- Introduced Species
With respect to a particular ecosystem, any species,
including its seeds, eggs, spores, or other biological
material capable of propagating that species, that is
not native to that ecosystem. Introduced species often
compete with and cause problems for native species.
Introduced species are also called exotic, nonnative, and
4
alien species. (see Invasive Species, Native Species)
- Invasive species
An introduced species that out-competes native species
4
for space and resources. (see Introduced Species, Native
Species)
- Invertebrate
Animals without a backbone. In ﬁshery management
terms, refers to shellﬁsh, including lobsters, clams,
12
shrimps, oysters, crabs, and sea urchins.
- Island
Emergent land mass larger than 1 square kilometer in
area, completely surrounded by water. Also refers to
aquatic habitats that are associated with land masses
completely surrounded by water or elevated ridges
extending from the seaﬂoor covered with shallow water
(banks) which may support unconsolidated sediments

24

(shoals), rocks, or shallow reefs rising above the surface
12
of the water.
- Isobath
A line on a map connecting points of equal bathymetry,
12
i.e. equal depth, in the ocean or another water body.

J
- Jigging
A method of ﬁshing using lures on a vertical line that
snag ﬁsh when they pass near. The line is moved up
and down (jigged) by hand or mechanically. Extremely
5
efﬁcient for ﬁshing oceanic squids at night.
- Juvenile
A young ﬁsh or animal that has not reached sexual
5
maturity.

K
- Krill
From the Norwegian word meaning “young ﬁsh”
and is now commonly used as the common term for
euphausids, a family of crustaceans found throughout
the world oceans. There are 85 species of krill, some of
which are exploited commercially. The Antarctic krill
is Euphausia superba. Other species include Euphausia
paciﬁca, Euphausia nana, Thysanoessa inermis,
5
Meganyctiphanes norvegica, Nyctiphanes australis.

L
- Lagoon
Coastal water body entirely or almost entirely enclosed
by a landmass with minimal connection to the sea; a
shallow, sheltered body of water separated from the
12
open sea by coral reefs, sand bars, or barrier islands.
- La Niña
Climate anomaly opposite to El Niño with unusually
cold ocean temperatures in the Equitorial Paciﬁc,
leading to warmer winter temperatures in the
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

southeastern United States and cooler temperatures
in the Paciﬁc Northwest. La Niña events occur after
some, but not all El Niño events. (see El Niño-Southern
Oscillation)
- Landings
1. The number or poundage of ﬁsh unloaded by
commercial ﬁshermen or brought to shore by
recreational ﬁshermen for personal use. Landings are
reported at the locations at which ﬁsh are brought to
shore2; 2. The part of the catch that is selected and kept
during the sorting procedures on board vessels and
successively discharged at dockside.5
- Landings Data
Information on the amount of ﬁsh caught and landed per
year.10
- Large Fluctuations
Large ﬂuctuations occur in a number of species where
the population size or area of distribution varies widely,
rapidly, and frequently, with a variation greater than one
order of magnitude.5
- Large Marine Ecosystem (LME)
A geographic area of an ocean that has distinct
bathymetry, hydrography, productivity, and trophically
5
dependent populations.
- Latent Species
A species of ﬁsh that has the potential to support a
10
directed ﬁshery.

- Length-Frequency Distribution
The number of individuals of a catch or catch sample in
each length interval. The modal size is the length group
with the higher number of individuals. Distributions may
be uni- or bimodal but are more generally multimodal,
5
reﬂecting multiple age-groups.
- Length Requirement
Speciﬁes that permits may not be registered for use with
vessels more than 5 feet longer (in overall length) than
the length endorsed on the permit.1
- Length-Weight Relationship
A mathematical formula for calculating the weight of a
ﬁsh in terms of its length. When only one is known, the
2
formula can determine the other. (see Age-Length Key)
- Level of Exploitation
This can mean the amount of catch or level of ﬁshing
mortality, or is sometimes used without any precise
quantity in mind.5
- License
Also known as permit. A license or permit is a document
giving the producer the right to operate in a ﬁshery
according to the terms established by the regulating
authority.5
- License Limitation
Legally restricting the number of commercial ﬁshermen
licensed to ﬁsh. Often a management agency uses this as
5
a means of limited entry. (see Limited Entry)

- Least Squares
A statistical criterion for the estimation of the goodness
of ﬁt in correlation analysis. Least squares methods aim
to minimize the sum of squared differences between
the observations and the predictions from a model.
For example, virtual population analysis (VPA) tuning
often involves ﬁnding the estimates of abundance
and mortality rates that minimize the sum of squared
differences between standardized catch per unit effort
(CPUE) and predicted abundance from the VPA.5 (see
Regression Analysis, Residual)

- Life Cycle
Successive series of changes through which an organism
5
passes in the course of its development.

- Length at First Maturity
Length at which 50 percent of the individuals of a
given sex (normally females) are considered to be
reproductively mature.5

- Limit Capacity
The maximum amount of ﬁsh that can be produced on a
sustainable basis by a fully utilized ﬂeet. Thus, the limit
capacity corresponds to maximum sustainable yield
5
(MSY).

- Length Frequency
A length frequency distribution is an arrangement of
recorded lengths (in a total catch, a stock, or a sample)
which indicates the number of individuals encountered
in each length interval.5
JUNE 2006

- Lifespan
The maximum expected age, on average, for a species,
cohort, stock, or a population in the absence of ﬁshing
or human-induced mortality. Lifespan is inversely
proportional to natural mortality. Often referred to as
Tmax in stock assessment models. Different and smaller
5
than the absolute maximum age.

- Limit Reference Points
Benchmarks used to indicate when harvests should
be constrained substantially so that the stock remains
within safe biological limits. The probability of
25

exceeding limits should be low. In the National Standard
Guidelines, limits are referred to as thresholds. In much
of the international literature (e.g. United Nations Food
and Agricultural Organization, FAO) thresholds are
used as buffer points that signal when a limit is being
3
approached. (see National Standard Guidelines)

hundred yards to several miles and may contain several
13
hundred to several thousand baited hooks.

- Limited Entry
A program that changes a common property resource
like ﬁsh into private property for individual ﬁshermen.
License limitation and individual transferable quotas
2
(ITQ) are two forms of limited entry.

- Long-Term Potential Catch (Yield)
The largest annual harvest, in weight, that can be
removed from a ﬁsh stock year after year, under existing
environmental conditions. This can be estimated in
various ways, from maximum values from production
models to average observed catches over a suitable
6
period of years. (see Maximum Sustainable Yield)

- Limited Entry Fishery
Fishery where the number of operators (and size of
boats) is restricted through license limitation or quota
systems, to control the amount of ﬁshing effort. It
frequently involves controls on the number and size of
vessels, and conditions relating to the transfer of ﬁshing
5
rights or the replacement of vessels.
- Littoral Zone
The zone on the coast where land mets sea. Often called
the intertidal zone but is more comprehensive, including
the supratidal and infratidal zones.12 (see Intertidal
Zone)
- Local Depletion
Local depletion occurs when localized catches take more
ﬁsh than can be replaced either locally or through ﬁsh
migrating into the catch area. Local depletion can occur
apart form the status of the overall stock, and can be
greater than decreases in the entire stock.1
- Location
Location deﬁnes a geographically or ecologically
distinct area in which a single event (e.g. pollution)
will soon affect all individuals of the taxon present. A
location usually, but not always, contains all or part of
a subpopulation of the taxon, and is typically a small
proportion of the taxon’s total distribution.5
- Logbook
A detailed, usually ofﬁcial, record of a vessel’s ﬁshing
activity registered systematically on board the ﬁshing
vessel, usually including information on catch and
its species composition, the corresponding ﬁshing
effort and location. Completion of logbooks may be a
compulsory requirement for a ﬁshing license.5
- Longline
Fishing method using a horizontal mainline to which
weights and baited hooks are attached at regular
intervals. The horizonal mainline is connected to the
surface by ﬂoats. The mainline can extend from several
26

- Longliner
Vessel speciﬁcally designed to catch ﬁsh using the
13
longline ﬁshing method.

M
- Macrofauna
Large animals (for example ﬁsh).12
- Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (Magnuson-Stevens Act)
Federal legislation responsible for establishing
the ﬁshery management councils (FMCs) and the
mandatory and discretionary guidelines for Federal
ﬁshery management plans (FMPs). This legislation was
originally enacted in 1976 as the Fishery Management
and Conservation Act; its name was changed to the
Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act
in 1980, and in 1996 it was renamed the MagnusonStevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act.13
- Maintainable Yield
The largest catch that can be maintained from the
population, at whatever level of stock size, over an
indeﬁnite period. It will be identical to the sustainable
yield for populations below the level giving the
maximum sustainable yield (MSY), and equal to the
MSY for populations at or above this level.6
- Management
The art of taking actions that affect a resource and its
exploitation with a view to achieve certain objectives,
such as maximizing the production of that resource.
Management includes, for example, ﬁshery regulations
such as catch quotas or closed seasons. Managers are
those who practice management.5
- Management Authority
The legal entity that has been assigned by a state or
states with a mandate to perform certain speciﬁed
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

management functions in relation to a ﬁshery, or an area
(e.g. a coastal zone). Generally used to refer to a state
authority, the term may also refer to an international
5
management organization.
- Management Objective
A formally established, more or less quantitative target
that is actively sought and provides a direction for
management action.
Comment: The United Nations Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO) Code of Conduct for Responsible
Fisheries provides that: “Fisheries management should
promote the maintenance of the quality, diversity and
availability of ﬁshery resources in sufﬁcient quantities
for present and future generations in the context of
food security, poverty alleviation and sustainable
development. Management measures should not only
ensure the conservation of the target species but also of
species belonging to the same ecosystem or associated
with or dependent upon the target species.” FAO (1995,
Article 6.2).
It also provides that management “maintains or restore
stocks at levels capable of producing maximum
sustainable yield, as qualiﬁed by relevant environmental
and economic factors.” FAO (1995, Article 7.2). 5
- Management Reference Points
Conventional (agreed values) of indicators of the
desirable or undesirable state of a ﬁshery resource of
the ﬁshery itself. Reference points could be biological
(e.g. expressed in spawning biomass or ﬁshing mortality
levels), technical (ﬁshing effort or capacity levels) or
economic (employment or revenues levels). They are
usually calculated from models in which they may
represent critical values.5
- Management Strategy
The strategy adopted by the management authority to
reach established management goals. In addition to the
objectives, it includes choices regarding all or some of
the following: access rights and allocation of resources
to stakeholders, controls on inputs (e.g. ﬁshing capacity,
gear regulations), outputs (e.g. quotas, minimum size at
landing), and ﬁshing operations (e.g. calendar, closed
areas, and seasons).5
Comment: The management strategy may also
include control laws establishing formally the course
of management action in relation to stock or ﬁshery
indicators. A precautionary management strategy
takes uncertainty into account in order to reduce the
5
probability of negative outcomes.

JUNE 2006

- Marginal Yield
The increase in yield obtained by an increase in ﬁshing
effort (or ﬁshing mortality) by one unit. In mathematical
terms, it is given by the slope of the tangent to the
relationship between effort and yield (or between ﬁshing
5
mortality and yield-per-recruit).
- Mariculture
1. Marine ﬁsh farming (aquaculture). Raising of marine
animals and plants in the ocean; 2. The raising of marine
ﬁnﬁsh or shellﬁsh under some controls. Ponds, pens,
tanks, or other containers may be used, and feed is often
used. A hatchery is also mariculture but the ﬁsh are
5
released before harvest size is reached.
- Marine
Waters that receive no freshwater input from the land
and are substantially of full oceanic salinity (>30
practical salinity units (PSU) throughout the year).12
- Marine Mammals
Warmblooded animals that live in marine waters and
breathe air directly. These include porpoises, dolphins,
2
whales, seals, and sea lions.
- Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA)
The MMPA prohibits the harvest or harassment of
marine mammals, although permits for incidental take
of marine mammals while commercial ﬁshing may be
1
issued subject to regulation. (see Incidental Take).
- Marine Pollution
The introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of
substances or energy into the marine environment
(including estuaries) resulting in such deleterious
effects as harm to living resources, hazards to human
health, hindrance to marine activities including ﬁshing,
impairment of quality for use of seawater, and reduction
of amenities.5
- Marine Protected Area (MPA)
Geographic area with discrete boundaries that has
been designated to enhance the conservation of marine
resources. This includes MPA-wide restrictions on some
activities such as oil and gas mining and the use of zones
such as ﬁshery and ecological reserves to provide higher
levels of protection.14 (see Marine Reserve, Protected
Area)
- Marine Recreational Fisheries Statistical Survey (MRFFS)
An annual national survey conducted by the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), in cooperation with
the coastal states, to estimate the number, catch, and
effort of recreational ﬁshermen. It serves as a basis for
many parts of ﬁsheries management plans (FMPs).2
27

- Marine Reserve
A geographically deﬁned space in the marine
environment where special restrictions are applied to
protect some aspect of the marine ecosystem including
plants, animals, and natural habitats.2 (see Marine
Protected Area, Protected Area)
- Mark-Recapture
The tagging and releasing of ﬁsh to be recaptured later
in their life cycles. These studies are used to elucidate
ﬁsh movement, migration, mortality, and growth to
2
estimate population size.
- Mature Individuals
The number of individuals known, estimated, or inferred
5
to be capable of reproduction.
- Maturity
Refers to the ability, on average, of ﬁsh of a given age or
size to reproduce. Maturity information, in the form of
percent mature by age or size, is often used to compute
5
spawning potential.
- Maximum Economic Yield (MEY)
This is the total amount of proﬁt that could be earned
from a ﬁshery if an individual owned it. An open-entry
policy usually results in participation by so many
ﬁshermen that proﬁts higher than opportunity cost
(economic rent) are driven to zero.2 (see Economic Rent)
Maximum Expected Stationary Yield (MESY)
Maximum statistical expectation of long-term yield,
considering uncertainties in parameter values and natural
11
(process) variability.
- Maximum Expected Log Stationary Yield (MELSY)
Maximum statistical expectation of the logarithm of
long-term yield, considering uncertainties in parameter
values and natural (process) variability.11
- Maximum Fishing Mortality Threshold (MFMT, Fthreshold)
One of the status determination criteria (SDC) for
determining if overﬁshing is occurring. It will usually
be equivalent to the ﬁshing mortality (F) corresponding
to the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) control rule.
If current ﬁshing mortality rates are above Fthreshold,
overﬁshing is occurring.3
- Maximum Likelihood
A statistical criterion for the estimation of parameters in
models. Maximum likelihood methods aim to maximize
the likelihood (or probability) of having collected the
observed data, given predictions from a model. For
example, virtual population analysis (VPA) tuning
often involves ﬁnding the estimates of abundance and
28

mortality rates that maximize the likelihood for the
observed standardized catch per unit effort (CPUE).
Under some conditions, the methods of maximum
5
likelihood and least squares give similar results. (see
Least Squares)
- Maximum Spawning Potential (MSP)
This type of reference point is used in some ﬁshery
management plans to deﬁne overﬁshing. The MSP is
the spawning stock biomass per recruit (SSB/R) when
ﬁshing mortality is zero. The degree to which ﬁshing
reduces the SSB/R is expressed as a percentage of the
MSP (i.e. %MSP). A stock is considered overﬁshed
when the ﬁshery reduces the %MSP below the level
speciﬁed in the overﬁshing deﬁnition. The values of
%MSP used to deﬁne overﬁshing can be derived from
stock-recruitment data or chosen by analogy using
available information on the level required to sustain the
stock.3
- Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY)
The largest average catch or yield that can continuously
be taken from a stock under existing environmental
conditions. For species with ﬂuctuating recruitment,
the maximum might be obtained by taking fewer ﬁsh
in some years than in others. Also called: maximum
equilibrium catch; maximum sustained yield; sustainable
6
catch.
- Maximum Willingness to Pay
The maximum price a person is willing to pay for a good
or service.
- Maximum Yield-per-Recruit
Maximum expected lifetime yield per ﬁsh recruited in
5
the stock. (see Yield-per-Recruit)
- Mean Generation Time
The average time it takes for a sexually mature female
ﬁsh to be replaced by an offspring with the same
reproductive capacity; used in setting maximum
allowable rebuilding time periods in rebuilding plans.
- Megafauna
Larger animals (e.g. whales).12
- Meristics
A series of measurements on a ﬁsh, such as scale counts,
spine counts, or ﬁn-ray counts, which are used to
10
separate different populations or species of ﬁsh. (see
Morphometrics)
- Mesh Size
The size of holes in a ﬁshing net. Minimum mesh sizes
are often prescribed by regulations in order to avoid the
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

capture of the young of valuable species before they
5
have reached their optimal size for capture.
- Mesopelagic Zone
The pelagic environment from a depth of approximately
12
100–200 meters to 1,000 meters.
- Metapopulation
A population that consists of a series of physically
separate subpopulations linked by dispersal.
Metapopulations persist as a result of a balance between
extinctions of subpopulations and recolonization
of habitat patches (and hence reestablishment of
14
subpopulations).
- Metric Ton (t, mt)
1,000 kilograms, equivalent to 2,204.6 pounds.
- Mid-Ocean Ridge
The continuous chain of volcanic submarine mountains
and elongated rises on the ocean ﬂoor, extending around
the earth where basalt periodically erupts, forming new
ocean crust; similar to continental rift zones; includes
12
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and East Paciﬁc Rise.
- Midwater
Any part of the water column between the surface and
the seaﬂoor. Fish living at the surface or on the seaﬂoor
do not live in midwater.5
- Migration
1. Systematic (as opposed to random) movement
of individuals of a stock from one place to another,
often related to season. A knowledge of the migration
patterns helps in targeting high concentrations of ﬁsh
and managing shared stocks; 2. The movements of ﬁsh
from feeding ground to spawning ground and back
again, from nursery ground to feeding ground, and from
spawning ground to nursery ground.5
- Minimum Mesh Size
The smallest size of mesh permitted in nets and traps;
this allows smaller individuals than a deﬁned mesh size
5
to escape unharmed.
- Minimum Size
The smallest individual size allowed in landings or
markets. Established by ﬁshery management councils
(FMCs) and enforced through control at landing sites
or markets, it is intended to minimize the catch of small
(undersized) ﬁsh or juveniles giving them a better
chance to grow before being vulnerable to ﬁshing. Based
on yield per recruit considerations and models, it aims at
5
avoiding or correcting growth overﬁshing.

JUNE 2006

- Minimum Stock Size Threshold (MSST, Bthreshold)
Another of the status determination criteria (SDC).
The greater of (a) 12 BMSY , or (b) the minimum stock
size at which rebuilding to BMSY will occur within 10
years while ﬁshing at the maximum ﬁshing mortality
threshold (MFMT). MSST should be measured in terms
of spawning biomass or other appropriate measures
of productive capacity. If current stock size is below
Bthreshold, the stock is overﬁshed.4
- Mixed Layer
The upper water layer in a two-layer system that is
mixed by the wind or by convection in circulation from
top to bottom of the layer, extending from the water
surface to the density-stability discontinuity.12 (see
Pycnocline, Stratiﬁcation, Thermocline)
- Mixed-Stock Exception
In “mixed-stock complexes,” many species of ﬁsh
swim together and are caught together. This becomes
a problem when some of these stocks are healthy and
some are overﬁshed, because even a sustainable harvest
of the healthy stocks can harm the depleted stock.
In order to avoid having to shut down all ﬁsheries to
protect one particular overﬁshed stock, the National
Standard Guidelines allow a “mixed-stock” exception
to the “overﬁshed” deﬁnition. This would allow higher
catches of some overﬁshed species than ordinarily
allowed in order to avoid severe hardship to ﬁshing
1
communities. (see National Standard Guidelines)
- Model
In ﬁsheries science, a description of something that
cannot be observed. Often a set of equations and data
used to make estimates.2
- Modeling
The construction of physical, conceptual, or
mathematical simulations of the real world. Models
help to show relationships between processes (physical,
economic, or social) and may be used to predict the
5
effects of changes in the components of a system.
- Mollusk
Invertebrates with a soft, unsegmented body, a muscular
foot, and, with some exceptions, a calcareous shell.
Includes the oyster, clam, mussel, snail, conch, scallop,
12
squid, and octopus.
- Monitoring
1. To observe and record changes; 2. The collection
of information for the purpose of assessment of the
progress and success of a plan. Monitoring is used for
the purpose of assessing performance of a management

29

plan or compliance scheme and revising them, or to
5
gather experience for future plans.
- Monte Carlo
Monte Carlo simulation is a statistical approach whereby
the inputs that are used for a calculation are resampled
many times assuming that the inputs follow known
statistical distributions. The Monte Carlo method is
used in many applications such as Bayesian analyses,
5
parametric bootstraps, and stochastic projections. (see
Bayesian, Bootstrap)
- Moratorium
A mandatory cessation of ﬁshing activities on a species
(e.g. the blue whale), in an area (e.g. a sanctuary), with
a particular gear (e.g. large scale driftnets), and for a
speciﬁed period of time (temporary, deﬁnitive, seasonal,
5
or related to reopening criteria).
- Morphometrics
The physical features of a ﬁsh (coloration for example);
differences may be used to identify separate ﬁsh
populations.10 (see Meristics)
- Mortality
Measures the rate of death of ﬁsh. Mortality occurs at
all life stages of the population and tends to decrease
with age. Death can be due to several factors such as
pollution, starvation, and disease but the main source of
death is predation (in unexploited stocks) and ﬁshing (in
exploited ones).5
- Mortality Rate
The rate at which the numbers in a population decrease
with time due to various causes. Mortality rates
are critical parameters in determining the effects of
harvesting strategies on stocks, yields, revenues, etc.
The proportion of the total stock (in numbers) dying
each year is called the “annual mortality rate.”5
- Mudﬂat
12
A muddy bottom that is exposed at low tide.
- Multiple-Use Marine Protected Area
An approach, often employed over much larger areas,
that allows for integrated management of complete
marine ecosystems, usually through a zoning process.14
- Multispecies Fishery
Fishery in which more than one species is caught at the
same time. Because of the imperfect selectivity of most
ﬁshing gears, most ﬁsheries are “multispecies.” The
term is often used to refer to ﬁsheries where more than
13
one species is intentially sought and retained.

30

- Multiplier
A number used to multiply a dollar amount to get an
estimate of economic impact. It is a way of identifying
impacts beyond the original expenditure. It can also be
used with respect to income and employment.2

N
- National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
Private nonproﬁt, self-perpetuating society of scientists.
The NAS was granted a charter by Congress in 1863 that
requires it to advise the Federal government on scientiﬁc
and technical matters.13
- National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
Passes by Congress in 1969, NEPA requires Federal
agencies to consider the environment when making
decisions regarding their programs. Section 102(2)(C)
requires Federal agencies to prepare an environmental
impact statement (EIS) before taking major Federal
actions that may signiﬁcantly affect the quality
of the human environment. The EIS includes the
environmental impact of the proposed action, any
adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided
should the proposed action be implemented, alternatives
to the proposed action, the relationship between local
short-term uses of the environment and long-term
productivity, and any irreversible commitments of
resources which would be involved in the proposed
1
action should it be implemented.
- National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
Federal agency within the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and responsible
for overseeing ﬁsheries science and regulation of the
13
ﬁsheries.
- National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA)
A bureau within the Department of Commerce
responsible for atmospheric, ocean, and coastal sciences
13
and Federal management.
- National Research Council (NRC)
Operating arm of the National Academy of Sciences
13
(NAS).
- National Standards
The Magnuson-Stevens Act requires that a ﬁshery
management plan and its regulations meet ten national
standards.2
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- National Standard 1
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall prevent overﬁshing while achieving, on a
continuing basis, the optimum yield from each ﬁshery
for the U.S. industry;” where “optimum yield” is deﬁned
in terms of the amount of ﬁsh which will provide the
greatest overall beneﬁt to the Nation.
- National Standard 2
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall be based upon the best scientiﬁc information
available.”
- National Standard 3
“To the extent practicable, an individual stock of ﬁsh
shall be managed as a unit throughout its range, and
interrelated stocks of ﬁsh shall be managed as a unit or
in close coordination.”
- National Standard 4
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall not discriminate between residents of different
states. If it becomes necessary to allocate or assign
ﬁshing privileges among various U.S. ﬁshermen,
such allocation shall be (a) fair and equitable to all
such ﬁshermen; (b) reasonably calculated to promote
conservation; and (c) carried out in such manner that
no particular individual, corporation, or other entity
acquires an excessive share of such privileges.”
- National Standard 5
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall, where practicable, consider efﬁciency in the
utilization of ﬁshery resources; except that no such
measure shall have economic allocation as its sole
purpose.”
- National Standard 6
“Conservation and management measures shall take
into account and allow for variations among, and
contingencies in, ﬁsheries, ﬁshery resources, and
catches.”
- National Standard 7
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall, where practicable, minimize costs and avoid
unnecessary duplication.”
- National Standard 8
States that “conservation and management measures
shall, consistent with the conservation requirements of
this Act (including the prevention of overﬁshing and
rebuilding of overﬁshed stocks) take into account the
importance of ﬁshery resources to ﬁshing communities

JUNE 2006

in order to (a) provide for the sustained participation
of such communities, and (b) to the extent practicable,
minimize adverse economic impacts on such
communities.”
- National Standard 9
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall, to the extent practicable, (a) minimize bycatch;
and (b) to the extent bycatch cannot be avoided,
minimize the mortality of such bycatch.” The National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) has deﬁned the term
“to the extent practicable” to include a consideration of
the effects of reducing bycatch and bycatch mortality on
the overall beneﬁt to the Nation.
- National Standard 10
Requires that “conservation and management measures
shall, to the extent practicable, promote the safety of
human life at sea.”
- National Standard Guidelines
Advisory guidelines issued by the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) to provide comprehensive
guidance for the development of ﬁshery management
plans and amendments that comply with the National
Standards of the Magnuson-Stevens Act. These
guidelines are found in Title 50, Code of Federal
1
Regulations, Part 600.
- Native Species
A local species that has not been introduced.12 (see
Introduced Species, Invasive Species)
- Natural Mortality (M)
1. Deaths of ﬁsh from all causes except ﬁshing (e.g.
ageing, predation, cannibalism, disease, and perhaps
increasingly pollution). It is often expressed as a rate
that indicates the percentage of ﬁsh dying in a year; e.g.
a natural mortality rate of 0.2 implies that approximately
20 percent of the population will die in a year from
causes other than ﬁshing; 2. The loss in numbers in a
year class from one age group to the subsequent one,
due to natural death.5
Comment: These many causes of death are usually
lumped together for convenience, because they are
difﬁcult to separate quantitatively. Sometimes natural
mortality is confounded with losses of ﬁsh from the
stock due to emigration. M has proven very difﬁcult
to estimate directly, and is often assumed based on the
general life history. M values is also often assumed to
remain constant through time and by age, a very unlikely
assumption.5

31

- Nautical Mile
International unit of distance equal to 1,852 meters or
6,067 feet.
Nearshore
5
Shallow waters at a small distance from the shore.
- Nearshore Marine System
Those waters in the region between the coastal land
margin and the 30-meter depth contour and where the
salinity is substantially marine (>30 practical salinity
12
units (PSU) throughout the year.)
- Nekton
Pelagic organisms that are free-swimming and so whose
movements are independent of the tides, currents, and
waves. Such animals include ﬁshes, whales, squids,
crabs, and shrimps. The distribution of nekton is limited
by temperature and nutrient supply and decreases with
4
decreasing depth. (see Benthic, Pelagic, Plankton)
- Neritic (Coastal) Zone
The pelagic marine environment above and on the
continental shelf, landward of the shelf-slope break and
having a depth of 30 to 200 meters.12
- Neritic System
Those waters between the 30-meter depth contour and
the continental shelf break, nominally at about 200
meters depth, and where the salinity is substantially
marine (>30 practical salinity units (PSU) throughout
the year). Although relatively farther from land than
coastal systems, these regions can receive signiﬁcant
runoff inﬂuence from land and the water column is
in close contact with the bottom relative to oceanic
12
systems.
- Net Economic Beneﬁts
Positive utility gained from the use of a resource, less
the opportunity costs. (see Gross Economic Beneﬁts)
- Net Present Value
The value of an enterprise at the present time, after
applying the process of discounting its costs and
beneﬁts.5

32

weight or equivalents). Nominal catches do not include
6
unreported discards.
- Nominal Eﬀort
Nominal effort pertains to measures of ﬁshing effort or
vessel carrying capacity that have not been standardized.
When catchability changes, e.g. through changes in
gear technology, trends in nominal effort can give a
misleading picture of trends in exploitation.5
- Non-Consumptive Use
Individuals may use (i.e. observe), yet not consume,
certain living ocean resources, like whale watching,
sight-seeing, or scuba diving. Additionally, individuals
might value the mere existence of living ocean resources
9
without actually observing them.
- Non-Governmental Organization (NGO)
Any organization that is not a part of Federal, state,
territorial, or municipal government. In ﬁsheries,
usually refers to nonproﬁt organizations involved in
5
environmental issues and activities.
- Non-Monetary Beneﬁts
Beneﬁts that are not, or cannot be, directly measured in
terms of monetary units. These include the satisfaction
realized from enjoying a certain way of life or style of
5
work, such as ﬁshing in a rural coastal community.
- Non-Point Sources
Sources of sediment, nutrients, or contaminants that
12
originate from many locations.
- Non-Target Species
Species not speciﬁcally targeted as a component of
the catch; may be incidentally captured as part of the
targeted catch.
- Non-Users
Individuals who obtain value from a resource, but do not
use the resource.9
- Normative
Analysis leading to a recommendation or prescription
that is based on value judgments or that reﬂects society’s
5
preferences.

- Network Marine Protected Areas
A group of reserves designed to meet objectives that
single reserves cannot achieve on their own. Networks
of reserves are linked by dispersal of marine organisms
and by ocean currents.14

- Norms
The understood rules for appropriate behavior. This is
broader than social organization and includes nonsocial
behavior.5

- Nominal Catch
The sum of the catches that are landed (expressed as live

- Notice Actions
Actions that a ﬁshery management council can take

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

without passing an amendment to implement the
regulation because the reasons for the action were
prespeciﬁed in the ﬁshery management plan (i.e. closing
a ﬁshing season if ﬁshing mortality exceeds a set limit).

- Oﬀshore Waters
Waters located well beyond the shores (beyond the edge
of the nearshore or inshore waters). Part of the oceanic
5
environment.

- Notice of Violation and Assessment (NOVA)
Tickets and penalties issued by National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration Ofﬁce of General Counsel
to ﬁshermen in violation of ﬁshing regulations. (see
Summary Settlement)

- Olympic Fishing
A popular term to denote the “race-to-ﬁsh” phenomenon
which is characterized by an increasing number of
highly efﬁcient vessels ﬁshing at an increasing pace,
5
with season length becoming shorter and shorter. (see
Derby Fishery, Race-to-Fish)

- Numbers-at-Age
The numbers of ﬁsh in each age class of a stock, in a
5
particular year.
Nursery
That part of a ﬁsh’s or animal’s habitat where the young
develop and grow.

- Open Access
Condition in which access to a ﬁshery is not restricted
(i.e. no license limitation, quotas, or other measures that
would limit the amount of ﬁsh that an individual ﬁsher
can harvest).13
- Open Access Resource
A good or service over which no property rights are
recognized.5

O
- Objective
Expresses the object of an action or what is intended
to be achieved. Any objective will include explicit
statements against which progress can be measured, and
identify which things are truly important and the way
they interrelate; quantiﬁed objectives are referred to as
5
targets.
- Observer
A certiﬁed person on board ﬁshing vessels who collects
scientiﬁc and technical information on the ﬁshing
operations and the catch. Observer programs can be
used for monitoring ﬁshing operations (e.g. areas ﬁshed,
ﬁshing effort deployed, gear characteristics, catches and
species caught, discards, collecting tag returns, etc.).
Observers may or may not have legal coercion powers
and, their data may or may not be used for nonscientiﬁc
purposes (e.g. enforcement) depending on the situation.5
- Oceanic
Related to open ocean waters beyond the edge of the
continental shelf and the neritic zone.5 (see Neritic)
- Oceanic System
Those waters of the open ocean, in areas beyond the
shelf break in depths generally greater than 200 meters,
extending to maximum ocean depths. These waters
are removed from primary continental inﬂuences, and
the seaﬂoor interacts little or not at all with the water
column.12 (see Pelagic)
JUNE 2006

- Opportunity Costs
1. Deﬁned as the beneﬁt foregone by using a resource
for one purpose instead of its next best alternative.
Typically applied to capital and labor inputs to reﬂect
their real costs to society as against their costs to a
private entrepreneur which may be lower or higher
because of subsidies, taxes, and various kinds of market
distortions; 2. An amount a ﬁsherman could earn for his
time and investment in another business or occupation;
3. The beneﬁts forgone by undertaking one activity
instead of another.5
- Optimum Age
The average age of the ﬁsh in a year-class at which
the instantaneous rate of natural mortality equals the
instantaneous rate of growth in weight for the year-class
as a whole. At this age, the biomass of the age class is
5
maximum.
- Optimum (Fishing) Capacity
The desired stock of inputs that will produce a desired
level of outputs (e.g. a set of target ﬁshing mortality
rates for the species being harvested) and will best
achieve the objectives of a ﬁshery management plan
(e.g. minimizing costs). Current or transient optimal
capacity (related to current ﬂeet and stock conditions)
may differ from long run optimal capacity (reﬂecting
management long-term objectives) particularly if the
ﬁshery resource is currently depleted and the manage5
ment strategy is to rebuild this depleted resource.

33

- Optimum Size
The average size of the ﬁsh in a year-class at the time
when the instantaneous rate of natural mortality equals
the instantaneous rate of growth in weight for the yearclass as a whole. At this size, the biomass of the age5
class is maximum.
- Optimum Sustainable Population (OSP)
Deﬁned by the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA)
as, “with respect to any population stock, the number of
animals which will result in the maximum productivity
of the population or the species, keeping in mind
the carrying capacity of the habitat and health of the
ecosystem of which they form a constituent element.”
(see Carrying Capacity, Potential Biological Removal)
- Optimum Yield (OY)
1. The harvest level for a species that achieves the
greatest overall beneﬁts, including economic, social,
and biological considerations. Optimum yield (OY) is
different from maximum sustainable yield (MSY) in
that MSY considers only the biology of the species.
The term includes both commercial and sport yields5;
2. The amount of ﬁsh that will provide the greatest
overall beneﬁt to the Nation, particularly with respect
to food production and recreational opportunities and
taking into account the protection of marine ecosystems.
MSY constitutes a “ceiling” for OY. OY may be lower
than MSY, depending on relevant economic, social, or
ecological factors. In the case of an overﬁshed ﬁshery,
OY should provide for the rebuilding of the stock to
3
BMSY.
- Organic Material
Once-living material (typically with high carbon
12
content), mostly of plant origin.
- Otolith
The ear bone of a ﬁsh. Otoliths have rings on them like
the rings on a tree stump, and are used to ﬁnd the age of
the ﬁsh and its growth rate.5
- Output Controls
Management instruments aimed at directly limiting ﬁsh
catch or landings through total allowable catch (TAC) or
5
quotas.
- Overcapacity
A level of ﬁshing pressure that threatens to reduce a
stock or complex below the abundance necessary to
support maximum sustainable yield (MSY) and allow an
1
economically sustainable ﬁshing industry.

34

- Overcapitalization
Where the amount of harvesting capacity in a ﬁshery
exceeds the amount needed to harvest the desired
5
amount of ﬁsh at least cost.
- Over-Exploitation
Rate of exploitation where the resource stock is drawn
below the size that, on average, would support the longterm maximum sustainable yield (MSY) of the ﬁshery.5
- Overexploited
When stock abundance is too low. The term is used
when biomass has been estimated to be below a limit
biological reference point that is used as the threshold
that deﬁnes “overﬁshed conditions.”5
- Overﬁshed
1. An overﬁshed stock or stock complex “whose size is
sufﬁciently small that a change in management practices
is required to achieve an appropriate level and rate of
rebuilding.” A stock or stock complex is considered
overﬁshed when its population size falls below the
minimum stock size threshold (MSST). A rebuilding
2
plan is required for stocks that are deemed overﬁshed ;
2. A stock is considered “overﬁshed” when exploited
beyond an explicit limit beyond which its abundance
is considered ‘too low’ to ensure safe reproduction. In
many ﬁsheries fora the term is used when biomass has
been estimated to be below a limit biological reference
point that is used as the signpost deﬁning an “overﬁshed
condition.” This signpost is often taken as being FMSY,
5
but the usage of the term may not always be consistent.
(see Minimum Stock Size Threshold)
Comment: The stock may remain overﬁshed (i.e. with a
biomass well below the agreed limit) for some time even
though ﬁshing pressure might be reduced or suppressed.5
- Overﬁshing
1. According to the National Standard Guidelines,
“overﬁshing occurs whenever a stock or stock complex
is subjected to a rate or level of ﬁshing mortality that
jeopardizes the capacity of a stock or stock complex
to produce maximum sustainable yield (MSY) on
a continuing basis.” Overﬁshing is occurring if the
maximum ﬁshing mortality threshold (MFMT) is
exceeded for 1 year or more3; 2. In general, the action
of exerting ﬁshing pressure (ﬁshing intensity) beyond
the agreed optimum level. A reduction of ﬁshing
pressure would, in the medium term, lead to an increase
in the total catch.5 (see National Standard Guidelines,
Maximum Fishing Mortality Threshold, Maximum
Sustainable Yield)

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

Comment: For long-lived species, overﬁshing (i.e. using
excessive effort) starts well before the stock becomes
overﬁshed. The use of the term “overﬁshing” may not
5
always be consistent.
- Overﬁshing Limit (OFL)
Point at which ﬁshing seriously compromised a ﬁshery’s
continued, sustained productivity. Overﬁshing limits
may be set based on standardized biological criteria
established for a particular ﬁshery. Overﬁshing limits
may also incorporate economic and social considerations
13
relevant to a particular ﬁshery.

P
- PMAX
The probability of rebuilding a ﬁsh stock by TMAX;
a higher PMAX probability is associated with a lower
ﬁshing mortality rate.
- Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO)
A long-term pattern of Paciﬁc Ocean climate variability,
with events lasting 20 to 30 years and oscillating
between warm and cool regimes. Unlike the El NiñoSouthern Oscillation (ENSO), the North Paciﬁc
and North America are most strongly affected, with
secondary signatures seen in the tropics. The PDO has
been linked to major changes in northeastern Paciﬁc
marine ecosystems—during warm events, coastal
productivity is enhanced in Alaska and inhibited off the
U.S. west coast; the opposite pattern is seen during cool
events. (see El Niño-Southern Oscillation)
Paciﬁc Coast Fisheries Information Network (PacFIN)
PacFIN provides commercial ﬁshery information for
Washington, Oregon, and California. Maintained by the
1
Paciﬁc States Marine Fisheries Commission (PSMFC).
Paciﬁc States Marine Fisheries Commission (PSFMC)
The PSMFC is a non-regulatory agency that serves
Alaska, California, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.
PSMFC (headquartered in Portland) provides a
communication exchange between the Paciﬁc Fishery
Management Council and the North Paciﬁc Fishery
Management Council, and a mechanism for Federal
funding of regional ﬁshery projects. The PSMFC
provides information in the form of data services for
various ﬁsheries.1
- Paralytic Shellﬁsh Poisoning (PSP)
Condition in humans caused by the ingestion of bivalve

JUNE 2006

mollusks that have accumulated dangerous levels of
13
neurotoxins from plankton. (see Red Tide)
- Parameter
A “constant” or numerical description of some property
5
of a population (which may be real or imaginary).
- Partial Recruitment
1. The degree to which a year class has joined the
ﬁshable stock. When a year class is young, only some of
its ﬁsh are big enough to be caught, so it is partly but not
5
fully recruited ; 2. Patterns of relative vulnerability of
ﬁsh of different sizes or ages due to the combined effects
6
of selectivity and availability.
- Party Boat
Any vessel-for-hire engaged in recreational ﬁshing and
hired (or leased, in whole or part) per a per-capita fee on
a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served basis.9 (see Head Boat)
- Pelagic
Inhabiting the water column as opposed to being
associated with the sea ﬂoor; generally occurring
1
anywhere from the surface to 1,000 meters. (see
Benthic, Demersal, Oceanic)
- Pelagic Fish
Fish that live in the open ocean at or near the water’s
surface and usually migrate long distances. Examples
include swordﬁsh, tunas, and many species of billﬁsh
and shark.12
- Permit Stacking
The registration of more than one limited entry permit
for a single vessel, where a vessel is allowed additional
catch for each additional permit registered for use with
the vessel.1
- Photic Zone
The surface layer where there is sufﬁcient light for
photosynthesis to occur.12
- Phytoplankton
Small, usually microscopic plants drifting in the upper
layers of the ocean, consuming nutrients and light
energy to produce biomass. In particularly nutrient-rich
conditions (including eutrophication) phytoplankton
5
blooms may occur and can be toxic. (see Primary
Production, Red Tide, Zooplankton)
- Pinniped
Of or belonging to the Pinnipedia, a suborder of
carnivorous aquatic mammals that includes the seals,
walruses, and similar animals having ﬁnlike ﬂippers
used for locomotion.4
35

- Plankton
Floating organisms whose movements are more or less
dependent on currents. While some zooplankton exhibit
active swimming movements that aid in maintaining
vertical position, plankton as a whole are unable to move
5
against appreciable currents. (see Zooplankton)
- Poaching
Catching ﬁsh for which no quota is held. Illegally
13
harvesting ﬁsh.
- Point Source
A source of sediment, nutrients, or contaminants into a
12
water body that comes from one discharge location.
- Policy
A ﬁsheries policy is the deﬁnite course or method
of action, selected from among alternatives, by a
government or its mandated ﬁsheries authority, in light
of given conditions including legal and constitutional
constraints, to guide and determine present and
future development and management actions towards
satisfaction of agreed objectives.5
- Policymaker
A person with power to inﬂuence or determine policies
and practices at an international, national, regional, or
5
local level.
- Pollution
1. The introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of
substances or energy into the marine environment,
including estuaries, which results or is likely to result
in such deleterious effects as harm to living resources
and marine life; hazards to human health; hindrance to
marine activities, including ﬁshing and other legitimate
uses of the sea; impairment of quality of sea water; and
reduction of amenities; 2. Presence of substances and
heat in environmental media (air, water, land) whose
nature, location, or quantity produces undesirable
environmental effects; 3. Activity that generates
5
pollutants.
- Pop-Up Tag
A tag that detaches itself from an animal after a
predetermined period of time has elapsed since
tagging. After detachment, the tag sends a signal via
satellite, providing its position and downloading any
other available information (if the pop-up tag is also
an archival one). This technology does not rely on the
recapturing/reporting of tagged individuals to recover
5
the information.

36

- Population
The number of individuals of a particular species that
live within a deﬁned area.4 (see Stock)
- Population Dynamics
The study of ﬁsh populations and how ﬁshing mortality,
growth, recruitment, and natural mortality affect them.2
- Population Model
A component of a stock assessment model, made
up of formulations that describe how the population
changes from one time period to the next. The types of
population models vary depending on the species life
history and on data availability. Population models can
roughly be classiﬁed as age/size structured or biomassbased, deterministic or stochastic, density-dependent
or density-independent, spatially structured or spatially
5
aggregated, equilibrium or nonequilibrium. (see Model,
Simulation)
- Possession Limit
The number and/or size of a species that a person can
legally have at any one time. Applies to commercial and
recreational ﬁshermen. A possession limit generally does
not apply to the wholesale market level and beyond.2
- Post Larvae
Fish that have changed from the larval form to the very
ﬁrst stages of juvenile or adult form.5
- Potential Biological Removal (PBR)
The maximum number of individuals, not including
natural mortalities, that may be removed from a marine
mammal stock while allowing that stock to reach or
maintain its optimum sustainable population.1 (see
Optimum Sustainable Population)
- Pots
Traps, designed to catch ﬁsh or crustaceans, in the form
of cages or baskets of various materials (wood, wicker,
metal rods, wire netting, etc.) and having one or more
openings or entrances. Usually set on the bottom, with
or without bait, singly or in rows, connected by ropes
(buoy-lines) to buoys on the surface showing their
position.5
- Practical Salinity Unit (PSU)
A unit of measurement of salinity similar to parts per
thousand (ppt).12
- Precautionary Approach (PA)
Set of measures taken to implement the Precautionary
Principle. A set of agreed cost-effective measures
and actions, including future courses of action, which

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

ensures prudent foresight, reduces or avoids risk to
the resource, the environment, and the people, to the
extent possible, taking explicitly into account existing
uncertainties and the potential consequences of “being
wrong.”5
- Precision
Is the closeness to each other of repeated measurements
of the same quantity or object, while accuracy is the
closeness of a measured or computed value to its true
value.6 (see Accuracy)
- Predation
Relationship between two species of animals in which
one (the predator) actively hunts and lives off the meat
5
and other body parts of the other (the prey).
- Predator-Prey Relationship
The interaction between a species (predator) that eats
another species (prey). The stages of each species’
life cycle and the degree of interaction are important
5
factors. (see Food Chain, Trophic Level)
- Preferred Alternative
The alternative that is identiﬁed as preferred by the
authors of an environmental impact statement or
environmental assessment. It is identiﬁed to indicate
which alternative is likely to be selected, thereby helping
the public focus its comments.1
- Pre-Recruits
Fish that have not yet reached the recruitment stage (in
age or size) to a ﬁshery.5
- Primary Production
Assimilation (gross) or accumulation (net) of energy
and nutrients by green plants and by organisms that use
5
inorganic compounds as food. (see Phytoplankton)
- Primary Productivity
A measurement of plant production that is the start of
the food chain. Much primary productivity in marine or
aquatic systems is made up of phytoplankton, which are
2
one-celled algae that ﬂoat freely in the water.
- Principal Species
Species important to the viability of the ﬁshery, both
5
target and nontarget.
- Private Costs and Beneﬁts
Costs and beneﬁts directly felt by individual economic
agents or groups as seen from their perspective
(externalities imposed on others are ignored). Costs and
beneﬁts are valued at the prices actually paid or received

JUNE 2006

by the group, even if these prices are highly distorted.
Sometimes termed “ﬁnancial” costs and beneﬁts.
Compare social costs and beneﬁts.5
- Processing
The preparation or packaging of ﬁsh to render it suitable
for human consumption, retail sale, industrial uses, or
long-term storage, including but not limited to cooking,
canning, smoking, salting, drying, ﬁlleting, freezing, or
rendering into meal or oil, but not heading and gutting
unless additional preparation is done.1
- Producer Surplus
Producer surplus is deﬁned as the difference between
what producers actually receive when selling a product
and the amount they would be willing to accept for a
unit of the good. (see Consumer Surplus, Total Welfare)
- Production
1. The total output especially of a commodity or an
industry; 2. The total living matter (biomass) produced
by a stock through growth and recruitment in a given
unit of time (e.g. daily, annual production). The “net
production” is the net amount of living matter added
to the stock during the time period, after deduction
of biomass losses through mortality; 3. The total
elaboration of new body substance in a stock in a unit of
time, irrespective of whether or not it survives to the end
of that time.5
- Production Expansion Factor (PEF)
The total number of Paciﬁc salmon released from a west
coast hatchery divided by the total number of tagged ﬁsh
released. Used to elucidate hatchery contribution and
ﬁsh survival rates.1
- Production Model
1. The highest theoretical equilibrium yield that can
be continuously taken (on average) from a stock under
existing (average) environmental conditions without
affecting signiﬁcantly the reproduction process. Also
referred to sometimes as potential yield; 2. Maximum
sustainable yield (MSY) or sustainable yield (SY). The
largest average catch or yield that can continuously
be taken from a stock under existing environmental
conditions. For species with ﬂuctuating recruitment,
the maximum might be obtained by taking fewer ﬁsh
5
in some years than in others. (see Carrying Capacity,
Maximum Equilibrium Catch, Maximum Sustainable
Yield, Schaefer Model, Sustainable Yield)
- Productivity
Relates to the birth, growth and death rates of a stock. A
highly productive stock is characterized by high birth,

37

growth, and mortality rates, and as a consequence, a
high turnover and production to biomass ratios (P/B).
Such stocks can usually sustain higher exploitation
rates and, if depleted, could recover more rapidly than
comparatively less productive stocks.5
- Proﬁt
The total revenue obtained from using a productive
resource minus all opportunity costs of production
(opportunity costs of entrepreneurs’ skills, labor, capital,
and ownership of natural resources).9
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement (PEIS)
An environmental impact statement (EIS) that applies to
an entire program or management regime, rather than a
1
speciﬁc action.
- Prohibited Species
Any species of ﬁsh that a vessel is not speciﬁcally
allocated or authorized to retain, including ﬁsh caught or
received in excess of any allocation or authorization.5

- Proposed Rule
The regulation that implements a ﬁshery management
plan (FMP) and is incorporated in the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) when approved. The public can
comment on the proposed rule as well as the FMP. (see
Code of Federal Regulations, Rulemaking)
- Protected Area
1. An area set aside for the preservation and protection
of highly important natural and cultural features
and for the regulation of the scientiﬁc, educational,
and recreational use. Such areas include national
parks, Nature reserves, wildlife sanctuaries, natural
monuments, archaeological reserves, forest reserves,
and marine reserves; 2. A geographically deﬁned area
which is designed and managed to achieve speciﬁc
5
conservation objectives. (see Marine Protected Area,
Marine Reserve)

- Projection
A computation of how the stock and ﬁshery will
behave in the future. Projections are made to address
“what-if” questions of relevance to management.
Short-term (1–4 years) projections are typically used
in support of decision-making on quotas. Longer term
projections become much more uncertain in terms of
absolute quantities, because predicted recruitment tends
to dominate the results and recruitment itself is very
difﬁcult to predict. For this reason, long-term projections
are more useful to evaluate overall management
5
strategies than for making detailed decisions.

- Protected Species
Refers to any species which is protected by either the
Endangered Species Act (ESA) or the Marine Mammal
Protection Act (MMPA), and which is under the
jurisdiction of the National Marine Fisheries Service
(NMFS). This includes all threatened, endangered, and
candidate species, as well as all cetaceans and pinnipeds,
8
excluding walruses.

- Property
Is a beneﬁt (or income) stream associated with a
5
property right.

- Probability
The statistical likelihood that something will occur.

- Property Rights
1. A legal right or interest in respect to a speciﬁc
property. A type of resource ownership by an individual
(individual right) or a group (communal right); 2. A
claim to the beneﬁt stream that some higher authority,
usually government, will agree to protect through
the assignment of duty to others who may covet, or
somehow interfere with, the beneﬁt stream.5
- Proposed Alternatives
Alternatives proposed by a ﬁshery management council
(FMC) for a proposed management action (such as
annual management speciﬁcations). The alternatives
are presented to the public for comment, and are voted
upon at a subsequent council meeting. The options
always include a “status quo” alternative; for example,
38

maintaining the current seasons allowable biological
1
catches (ABCs) and optimum yields (OYs).

- Pulse Fishing
Harvesting a stock of ﬁsh, then moving on to other
10
stocks or waiting until the original stock recovers.

- Producer Surplus
The welfare a producer derives from selling a good,
represented by the difference between the revenue the
seller gets for a good and the minimum amount they
would accept to produce it.
- Pure Public Good
A good that can be used by anyone and for which one
person’s use does not diminish the good’s value for
5
others.
- Purse Seine
Nets characterized by the use of a purse line at the
bottom of the net. The purse line enables the net to be
closed like a purse and thus retain all the ﬁsh caught.
The purse seines, which may be very large, are operated
by one or two boats. The most usual case is a purse seine
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

operated by a single boat, with or without an auxiliary
5
skiff.

applied to separate parts of the stock distinguished by
5
size, sex, etc.

- Pycnocline
1. The transitional zone in the water column between
layers of two densities; 2. Pycnocline or sharp density
gradients; this parcel includes the air-water interface.
Pycnoclines are generally formed by salinity or
temperature differences between the upper and lower
water layers and create effective barriers to transport
across layers.12 (see Mixed Layer, Stratiﬁcation,
Thermocline)

- Rate of Natural Increase
(see Instantaneous Rate of Surplus Production)

Q
- q (“que”)
(see Catchability Coefﬁcient)
- Quota
A speciﬁed numerical harvest objective, the attainment
(or expected attainment) of which causes closure of the
1
ﬁshery for that species or species group.
- Quota Shares
A share of the total allowable catch (TAC) allocated
to an operating unit such as a vessel, a company or an
individual ﬁsherman (individual ﬁshing quota, IFQ)
depending on the system of allocation. Quotas may or
may not be transferable, inheritable, and tradable. While
generally used to allocate total allowable catch, quotas
could be used also to allocate ﬁshing effort or biomass.5

R
- Race-to-Fish
A pattern of ﬁshing characterized by an increasing
number of highly efﬁcient vessels ﬁshing at an
increasing pace, with season length becoming shorter
and shorter.5 (see Derby Fishery, Olympic Fishing)
- Rate of Fishing
(see Instantaneous Rate of Fishing Mortality)
- Rate of Exploitation
The fraction, by number, of the ﬁsh in a population at
a given time, which is caught and killed by man during
the year immediately following. The term may also be
JUNE 2006

- Rate of Removal
An inexactly deﬁned term that can mean either rate of
exploitation or rate of ﬁshing, depending on the context.5
- Rebuilding
1. Implementing management measures that increase
a ﬁsh stock to its target size1; 2. For a depleted stock,
or population, taking action to allow it to grow back
to a predeﬁned target level. Stock rebuilding at least
back to the level (BMSY) at which a stock could produce
maximum sustainable yield (MSY).5
- Rebuilding Analysis
An analysis that uses biological information to describe
the probability that a stock will rebuild within a given
1
time frame under a particular management regime.
- Rebuilding Plan
1. A document that describes policy measures that will
be used to rebuild a ﬁsh stock that has been declared
overﬁshed1; 2. A plan that must be designed to recover
stocks to the BMSY level within 10 years when they are
overﬁshed (i.e. when biomass [B] < minimum stock
4
size threshold [MSST]). (see Minimum Stock Size
Threshold)
- Recreational Fishery
Harvesting ﬁsh for personal use, sport, and challenge
(e.g. as opposed to proﬁt or research). Recreational
ﬁshing does not include sale, barter, or trade of all or
part of the catch.5
- Recreational Fishery Information Network (RecFin)
A database managed by the Paciﬁc States Marine
Fisheries Commission (PSMFC) that provides
recreational ﬁshery information for Washington, Oregon,
and California.1
- Recruit
1. A young ﬁsh entering the exploitable stage of its life
cycle; 2. A member of “the youngest age group which is
5
considered to belong to the exploitable stock.”
- Recruitment (R)
1. The amount of ﬁsh added to the exploitable stock
each year due to growth and/or migration into the ﬁshing
area. For example, the number of ﬁsh that grow to
become vulnerable to the ﬁshing gear in one year would
be the recruitment to the ﬁshable population that year; 2.
39

This term is also used in referring to the number of ﬁsh
from a year class reaching a certain age. For example, all
ﬁsh reaching their second year would be age 2 recruits.6
- Recruitment Curve
A graph of the progeny from an adult year-class at the
time they reach a speciﬁed age (for example, the age
at which half of the brood has become vulnerable to
ﬁshing), plotted against the abundance of the stock that
5
produced them.
- Recruitment Overﬁshing
A situation in which the rate of ﬁshing is (or has been)
such that annual recruitment to the exploitable stock
has become signiﬁcantly reduced. The situation is
characterized by a greatly reduced spawning stock,
a decreasing proportion of older ﬁsh in the catch,
and generally very low recruitment year after year. If
prolonged, recruitment overﬁshing can lead to stock
collapse, particularly under unfavorable environmental
conditions.5
- Recruitment per Spawning Stock Biomass (R/SSB)
The number of ﬁshery recruits (usually age 1 or 2)
produced from a given weight of spawners, usually
expressed as numbers of recruits per kilogram of mature
ﬁsh in the stock. This ratio can be computed for each
year class and is often used as an index of pre-recruit
survival, since a high R/SSB ratio in one year indicates
above-average numbers resulting from a given spawning
biomass for a particular year class, and vice versa.3
- Recruits
The numbers of young ﬁsh that survive (from birth) to a
speciﬁc age or grow to a speciﬁc size. The speciﬁc age
or size at which recruitment is measured may correspond
to when the young ﬁsh become vulnerable to capture in
a ﬁshery or when the number of ﬁsh in a cohort can be
reliably estimated by a stock assessment.5
- Red Tide
Proliferation of marine plankton that is toxic and often
fatal to ﬁsh. This natural phenomenon is stimulated by
phosphorus and other nutrients that are discharged into
waterways by human beings. The color of the tide can
5
be red, yellow, green, or brown. (see Phytoplankton)
- Reef
A large ridge or mound-like structure within a body
of water that is build by calcareous organisms such as
coral, red algae, and bivalves.12 (see Atoll)
- Reef Fish
Fish that live mostly on or around reefs. Reef ﬁsh
include snappers, groupers, grunts, porgies, and others.
40

- Reference Level
A particular level of an indicator (e.g. level of
ﬁshing effort, ﬁshing mortality, or stock size) used
as a benchmark for assessment and management
performance.5
- Reference Point
1. A reference point indicates a particular state of a
ﬁshery indicator corresponding to a situation considered
as desirable (target reference point) or undesirable and
requiring immediate action (limit reference point and
threshold reference point); 2. An estimated value derived
from an agreed scientiﬁc procedure and/or model,
which corresponds to a speciﬁc state of the resource
and of the ﬁshery, and that can be used as a guide
for ﬁsheries management. Reference points may be
general (applicable to many stocks) or stock-speciﬁc5;
3. Values of parameters (e.g. BMSY, FMSY, F0.1) that are
useful benchmarks for guiding management decisions.
Biological reference points are typically limits that
should not be exceeded with signiﬁcant probability (e.g.
3
MSST) or targets for management (e.g. OY).
- Refuges
A part of the range of a stock that is not accessible to
ﬁshing. If the species in question is not too diffusive, the
existence of such refuges may enable it to persist under
a higher level of ﬁshing mortality than it otherwise
would.5
- Regime Shift
A (medium- or long-term) shift in environmental
conditions that impacts the productivity of a stock.5
- Regression Analysis
A statistical method to estimate any trends that might
exist among important factors; an example in ﬁsheries
management is the link between catch and other factors
like ﬁshing effort and natural mortality.10 (see Least
Squares, Residuals)
- Regulative Capacity
A population’s tendency to revert towards some typical
average level of abundance rather than to increase or
decline indeﬁnitely or to drift aimlessly. The regulative
mechanisms by which this can be achieved include,
for example, inverse dependence of survival rate
(and/or reproductive success) on population density, a
phenomenon often used synonymously with density5
dependence and sometimes called homeostasis.
- Regulatory Amendment
An option available to ﬁshery management councils for
making regulatory changes to a ﬁshery management

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

plan; different from a full amendment but still requires
10
some opportunity for public input.
- Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)
Enacted in 1980 to reduce the burden of regulatory
and record-keeping requirements on small businesses
organizations. The RFA requires that ﬁshery
management plans undergo a regulatory ﬂexibility
analysis. (see Executive Order 12866)
- Regulatory Flexibility Analysis
Conducted for each ﬁshery management plan (FMP) to
study the costs and beneﬁts that the plan may have on an
individual small business or organization (e.g. a single
ﬁshing vessel). The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA)
mandates this analysis and allows it to be combined with
the draft regulatory impact review (RIR). (see Executive
Order 12866)
- Regulatory Impact Review (RIR)
A regulatory impact review (RIR) is required by the
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for all
regulatory actions of public interest. It is the basis for
determining whether any proposed regulations are a
“signiﬁcant regulatory action” under certain criteria
provided in Executive Order 12866 and whether the
proposed regulations will have a “signiﬁcant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities” in
compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA).
- Relative Abundance
Relative abundance is an estimate of actual or absolute
abundance; usually stated as some kind of index; for
example, as bottom trawl survey stratiﬁed mean catch
per tow.6
- Reliability
The extent to which a resource, if managed properly, can
be depended on to provide a reasonably constant yield.
An unreliable resource is one that may fail suddenly
due to causes not obviously related to ﬁshing.5 (see
Robustness)
- Removals
All of the ﬁsh “removed” from a stock by ﬁshing,
5
including the catch and any ﬁsh killed but not caught.
- Renewable Natural Resource
Natural resources that, after exploitation, can return
to their previous stock levels by natural processes of
growth or replenishment. Conditionally renewable
resources are those whose exploitation eventually
reaches a level beyond which regeneration will become
impossible. Such is the case with the clear-cutting of
tropical forests.5
JUNE 2006

- Rent
1. In a sole ownership ﬁshery, the difference between
the total revenues obtained from the ﬁshery resource
and the total costs of production, i.e. capital and labor
valued at their opportunity costs. The total costs of
production include a reasonable proﬁt and the rent is
often considered as a “surplus” proﬁt, over and above
what would be considered a ‘normal’ rate of return. For
this reason, the decision as to who gets the rent (e.g.
society, the management authority, or the ﬁshermen)
remains a key policy issue; 2. Any payment to an owner
of a productive resource that is an amount in excess of
the payment needed to keep the resource in its current
use. Applied to ﬁsheries, the amount of pure proﬁt that
can be gained from a ﬁshery resource by using no more
ﬁshing effort than needed to harvest the resource. Under
open access, the resource would yield no economic rent,
whereas a sole owner would seek to maximize economic
rent.5
- Replacement Yield
The amount of yield in weight that can be removed from
a population of ﬁsh without leading to biomass increase
or decline. When the population net productivity is high
(e.g. at medium levels of, close to maximum sustainable
yield, MSY), the replacement yield will also be high.
Conversely, when the productivity is low (e.g. when
the population is underexploited or overexploited),
the replacement yield will be low. In either case, if the
actual yield taken is equal to the replacement yield, then
the biomass will not change from one year to the next.5
- Residual
In statistical models, a residual is the difference between
an observed quantity and the prediction given by the
5
model. (see Least Squares, Regression Analysis)
- Resilience
Capacity of a natural system (ﬁsheries community or
ecosystem) to recover from heavy disturbance such as
intensive ﬁshing.5
- Resource Rent
In the ﬁsheries context, the value to ﬁshers of the ﬁsh
in the water before they are caught. It is usually a large
5
component of the economic rent.
- Resource Valuation
Calculation or estimation of the economic value of a
5
natural resource.
- Resources
1. A natural source of wealth and revenue. Biological
resources include genetic resources, organisms or parts
thereof, populations, or any other biotic component
41

of ecosystems with actual or potential use of value
for humanity. Fishery resources are those resources of
value to ﬁsheries; 2. Anything that has value; living and
nonliving components of nature such as ﬁsh, oil, water,
and air.5
- Responses
Human actions, including policies, strategies, and
interventions, to address speciﬁc issues, needs,
opportunities, or problems. In the context of ecosystem
management, responses may be of legal, technical,
institutional, economic, and behavioral nature and
may operate at local or micro, regional, national, or
5
international level and at various time scales.
- Responsible Fisheries
The concept of responsible ﬁsheries encompasses the
sustainable utilization of ﬁshery resources in harmony
with the environment; the use of capture and aquaculture
practices which are not harmful to ecosystems,
resources, and their quality; the incorporation of added
value to such products through transformation processes
meeting the required sanitary standards; the conduct of
commercial practices so as to provide consumers access
to good quality products.5
- Retention
In stock assessment, the probability of a ﬁsh
encountering ﬁshing gear (hook, webbing, mesh, trap)
and being retained by it after coming in contact with
it. Often expressed as a function of size or age.5 (see
Retention Curve)

- Risk Assessment
A process of evaluation including the identiﬁcation
of the attendant uncertainties, of the likelihood and
severity of an adverse effect(s)/event(s) occurring to
man or the environment following exposure under
deﬁned conditions to a risk source(s). A risk assessment
comprises hazard identiﬁcation, hazard characterization,
5
exposure assessment, and risk characterization.
- Risk Management
The process of weighing policy alternatives in the light
of the result of a risk assessment and other relevant
evaluation and, if required, selecting and implementing
appropriate control options (which should, where
appropriate, include monitoring or surveillance).5
- River Plume
Turbid freshwater ﬂowing from land and generally in the
distal part of a river (mouth) outside the bounds of an
12
estuary or river channel.

- Retention Curve
Relationship between the size (age) of a ﬁsh and
its probability to be retained by the gear (a hook, a
webbing, a mesh, a trap) after encountering it.5

- Robustness
The capacity of a population to persist in the presence of
ﬁshing. This depends on the existence of compensatory
mechanisms.5 (see Reliability)

- Reversibility
The extent to which a change in a stock or ecosystem
induced by exploitation will reverse itself when the
causative factor is removed. Extinction of a species is an
example of an irreversible change.5

- Round Weight
The weight of the whole ﬁsh before processing or
removal of any part.5

- Riparian
13
Living on or near the bank of a river or lake.
- Riparian Habitat
Areas adjacent to rivers and other water bodies that have
a high density and large variety of plants and animal
species relative to nearby uplands.5

42

- Risk
1. In general, the possibility of something undesirable
happening, of harm or loss. A danger or a hazard.
A factor, thing, element, or course involving some
uncertain danger; 2. In decision-theory, the degree or
probability of a loss; expected loss; average forecasted
loss. This terminology is used when enough information
is available to formulate probabilities; 3. The probability
of adverse effects caused under speciﬁed circumstances
by an agent in an organism, a population, or an
ecological system5

- Run
Seasonal migration undertaken by ﬁsh, usually as part
of their life history; for example, spawning run of
salmon, upstream migration of shad. Fishers may refer
to increased catches as a “run” of ﬁsh, a usage often
5
independent of their migratory behavior.
- Runoﬀ
Portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation water
that ﬂows across the ground’s surface and is eventually
returned to streams. Runoff can pick up pollutants from
5
air or land and carry them to receiving waters.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Resource Management Plan (RMP)
A plan that covers impacts to listed species from
activities of state and local governments, under section
1
4(d) of the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
- Rulemaking
The process of developing Federal regulations which
occurs in several steps, including publishing proposed
rules in the Federal Register, accepting comments on
the proposed rule, and publishing the ﬁnal rule. An
“advanced notice of proposed rulemaking” is published
when dealing with especially important or controversial
rules.1 (see Code of Federal Regulations, Proposed
Rule)

S
- Salinity
The total mass of salts dissolved in seawater per
unit mass of water; generally expressed in parts per
thousands (ppt).12
- Salt Marsh
A macrohabitat comprised of emergent rooted
macrophytes in a soft sedimentary substrate tolerant of
long periods of partial submersion along the shores of
estuaries and sheltered coasts.12
- Salt Wedge
A layer of denser, saltier seawater that intrudes into
coastal waters in the form of a wedge along the seabed
and ﬂows landward along the bottom in estuaries. The
lighter freshwater from riverine sources overrides the
12
denser saltwater.
- Saltonstall-Kennedy Act (SK Funds)
The Saltonstall-Kennedy Act allocates 30% of the
collected duties for imported ﬁshery products to
technological, biological, marketing, and other research
and services in order to promote the free ﬂow of
domestically produced ﬁshery products and to develop
1
markets for domestic ﬁshery products.
- Sample
A proportion or a segment of a ﬁsh stock that is removed
for study, and is assumed to be representative of the
whole. The greater the effort, in terms of both numbers
and magnitude of the samples, the greater the conﬁdence
that the information obtained is a true reﬂection of the
status of a stock (level of abundance in terms of numbers
or weight, age composition, etc.).6
JUNE 2006

- Sampling Design
The sampling design of a scientiﬁc survey refers to the
statistical techniques and methods adopted for selecting
a sample and obtaining estimates of the survey variables
from the selected sample.5
- Sashimi
Japanese term for sliced ﬁsh (especially tuna) and
shellﬁsh (scallop, abalone, lobster, squid, octopus)
5
served raw as a delicacy.
- Satellite Imagery
Remote sensing imagery gathered by earth-orbiting
satellites (e.g. Landsat). Images are in speciﬁc
wavebands (visible, infrared, etc.), which may be
5
combined for purposes of interpretation.
Comment: Images look like photographs but are not
obtained by photographic methods, hence the terms
“images or imagery.” Data from satellite imagery can
be interpreted visually or analyzed by computers in
digitized form; they can also be entered directly into
geographic information systems (GIS).5
- Scattergram
A visual (not statistical) method; graphically shows the
relationship between two factors (such as ﬁsh age and
ﬁsh size).
- Scenario
A plausible and often simpliﬁed description of how
the future may develop based on a coherent and
internally consistent set of assumptions about key
driving forces (e.g., rate of technology change, prices)
and relationships. Scenarios are neither predictions nor
projections and sometimes may be based on a “narrative
storyline.” Scenarios may be derived from projections
but are often based on additional information from other
sources.5
- Schaefer Model
The basic form of production model in which the
relation between yield and effort takes the form of a
symmetric parabola. In the Schaefer Model, BMSY is
at one-half of the carrying capacity.5 (see Carrying
Capacity, Production Model)
- School
Aggregation of ﬁsh that move together as a group. It is
usually considered that schooling reduces the impact
of predation. Schools can be themselves aggregated in
5
concentrations.
- Scientiﬁc Cruise
The period of time during which a scientiﬁc research
43

vessel is operated in furtherance of a scientiﬁc research
project, beginning when the vessel leaves port to
undertake the project and ending when the vessel
completes the project as provided for in the applicable
scientiﬁc research plan.5
- Scientiﬁc Fishery (Resource) Survey
Sampling, collecting, observing, or surveying the ﬁsh or
ﬁshery resources, on board scientiﬁc research vessels,
to increase scientiﬁc knowledge of the ﬁshery resources
or their environment, or to test a hypothesis as part of
a planned, directed investigation or study conducted
according to methodologies generally accepted as
5
appropriate for scientiﬁc research.
Comment: A scientiﬁc survey may involve ﬁshing, but
is usually exempted from ﬁshing regulations. It may
address one or more issues involving taxonomy, biology,
physiology, behavior, disease, aging, growth, mortality,
migration, recruitment, distribution, abundance, ecology,
stock structure, bycatch, and catch estimation of ﬁnﬁsh
and shellﬁsh (invertebrate) species considered to be a
component of the ﬁshery resources. It does not include
the collection and retention of ﬁsh outside the scope of
the applicable research plan. The capture and landing of
quantities of ﬁsh or invertebrates for commercial testing
of ﬁshing gear, product development, market research,
and/or public display may not be considered scientiﬁc
research activities and require permission under
exempted ﬁshing procedures. The activity of foreign
ﬁshery research vessels in an exclusive economic zone
(EEZ) will usually be considered as scientiﬁc research if
they are carried out in full cooperation with the coastal
5
state.
- Scientiﬁc (Fisheries) Research Vessel
A vessel owned or chartered by, and controlled by, a
government agency, a university (or other educational
institution accredited by a recognized national or
international accreditation body), an international treaty
organization, or a scientiﬁc institution. The vessel must
have scientiﬁc research as its exclusive mission during
the scientiﬁc cruise in question and its operations must
be conducted in accordance with a scientiﬁc research
plan.5
- Scientiﬁc and Statistical Committee (SSC)
An advisory committee of a regional ﬁshery
management council (FMC) composed of scientists,
economists, and other technical experts. The MagnusonStevens Act requires that each council maintain an
SSC to assist in gathering and analyzing statistical,
biological, ecological, economic, social, and other
scientiﬁc information that is relevant to the management
of council ﬁsheries.1 (see Advisory Panel)
44

- Seagrass
Rooted, grasslike ﬂowering plants, such as eelgrass, that
are adapted to live at sea, submersed, and can tolerate a
12
saline environment.
- Seamount
A large isolated elevation rising more than 1,000 meters
above the sea ﬂoor, and characteristically of conical
form.5 (Notable examples include Shimada Seamount in
the Eastern Equatorial North Paciﬁc and Bear Seamount
in the New England Seamount Chain.)
- Seasonal Closure
Closed season. The banning of ﬁshing activity (in an
area or of an entire ﬁshery) for a few weeks or months,
5
to protect juveniles or spawners.
- Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary has responsibility for reviewing,
approving, and implementing ﬁshery management plans
(FMPs).
- Secretarial Fishery Management Plan
A plan developed by the Secretary of Commerce in
response to an emergency, a council’s failure to act, or
2
for highly migratory species.
- Sedentary Species
Organisms which, at the harvest stage, either are
immobile on or under the seaﬂoor or are unable to move
except in constant physical contact with the seaﬂoor or
5
the subsoil.
- Seine Net
Nets that are usually set from a boat, and can be
operated either from the shore (beach seines) or from
the boat itself (e.g. purse seines). The manner of capture
is to surround an area of water with a very long net,
with or without a bag at the center. The net is usually
operated by two ropes ﬁxed to its ends, used both for
hauling it in and for herding the ﬁsh.5 (see Purse Seine)
- Selective Gear
A gear allowing ﬁshers to capture few (if any) species
other than the target species.5
- Selectivity
1. Ability to target and capture ﬁsh by size and species
during harvesting operations, allowing bycatch of
juvenile ﬁsh and nontarget species to escape unharmed;
2. In stock assessment, conventionally expressed as a
relationship between retention and size (or age) with no
reference to survival after escapement.5

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Sensitivity Analysis
In stock assessment modeling, the process of testing
the sensitivity of model results in relation to errors and
uncertainties in the input parameters. For example,
a virtual population analysis (VPA) might be used
to determine the ﬁshing mortality rates over several
years. The results might be conditioned on an assumed
annual natural mortality rate (M) of 0.2. The sensitivity
of this assumption might be examined by redoing the
VPA based upon a different M, perhaps M=0.15 to
0.3. From the sensitivity analysis one can determine
the importance of particular parameters to the overall
scientiﬁc advice.5
- Separability
1. Separability is the assumption, made in some agestructured stock assessment models (used to track
changes in ﬁshing mortality by ﬁsh age and by ﬁshing
year) that the ﬁshing mortality matrix can be partitioned
into two components: An age-speciﬁc component that
does not vary over time (i.e. a constant exploitation
pattern), and an annual multiplier that scales the agespeciﬁc pattern up or down; 2. Independence among
resources and in economics; an ability to substitute
environmental inputs in order to produce outputs.
Therefore, these resources may be managed or utilized
separately due to the lack of strong linkages to other
5
large marine ecosystem (LME) components.
- Sequential Population Analysis
Generic name for methods of back-calculating stock
sizes, recruitment levels, and ﬁshing mortality for
different ages/years using catch-at-age data. A statistical
criterion may be used in addition to ﬁt indices of
abundance.5
- Sessile
5
Attached to the substrate.
- Set Gillnet
A gillnet ﬁxed to the bottom, or at a certain distance
above it, by means of anchors or ballast sufﬁciently
heavy to neutralize the buoyancy of the ﬂoats.5
- Set Longline
Longlines consist of a main line, sometimes of
considerable length, to which snoods with baited or
unbaited hooks are ﬁxed at regular intervals. The main
line is set either horizontally on or near the bottom or
5
less commonly near the surface.
- Sexual Dimorphism
Pertains to systematic differences between males and
females. Several species of tunas and billﬁshes show
sexual dimorphism in growth or mortality.5
JUNE 2006

- Shadow Price
In economic analysis, this is any distortion of a free
market price that is made in order to reﬂect the real
scarcity value of foods or services, including labor. An
example of a shadow price is the elimination of the
5
effect of taxes or subsidies.
- Shared Stock
Stocks of ﬁsh that migrate across the exclusive
economic zone (EEZ) boundary of adjacent or opposite
coastal states.5
- Shelf Break
Region where the continental shelf and continental slope
meet; i.e. where the more gently sloping region of the
seabed adjacent to a landmass rather abruptly slopes
steeply down towards the ocean depths; commonly
5
around depths of 200 meters.
- Shelf Edge
A narrow zone at the outer margin of a shelf along
5
which there is a marked increase of slope.
- Shellﬁsh
Shellﬁsh include both mollusks, such as clams, and
5
crustaceans, such as lobsters.
- Shoal
School of ﬁsh, but usually at the surface or in shallow
5
water.
- Shoaling Fish
Species of relatively small (usually pelagic) ﬁsh that
congregate in large schools, such as anchoveta and
sardines.5
- Sink
Habitats in which birth rates are lower than dealth rates
and emigration is lower than immigration, as applied
to equilibrium populations. A more general deﬁnition
is that a sink is a compartment that is a net importer of
14
individuals. (see Source)
- Simulation
In ﬁsheries, the use of a body of numerical techniques
and speciﬁed inputs to reproduce by calculations
the functioning of a stock or ﬁshery.5 (see Model,
Population Model)
Comment: Simulations may be deterministic (assuming
no variability) or stochastic (to explore the range of
variability in the results). Sensitivity analyses and
projections of the status of the ﬁshery system into the
future are forms of simulation. There are several ways
of accounting for uncertainty in simulations, such as
45

bootstrapping, Bayesian methods, and Monte Carlo
5
simulations. (see Bayesian, Deterministic, Monte Carlo,
Sensitivity Analysis, Stochastic)

separating small and large-scale producers is arbitrary.
What is considered small scale in one country or region
may be considered large scale in another.5

- Single-Species Fishery
A type of ﬁshery in which ﬁshers target only one species
of ﬁsh, although it is usually impossible not to catch
others incidentally.

- Smolt
An adolescent salmon which has metamorphosed and
which is found on its way downstream toward the sea.5

- Single-Species Model
A model describing the dynamics of a species that does
not explicitly incorporate the effects of interactions with
other species.5

- Social Capital
The social resources (networks, memberships of groups,
relationships of trust, access to wider institutions
of society) upon which people draw in pursuit of
livelihoods.5

- Size Distribution
A breakdown of the number of ﬁsh of various sizes in a
sample or catch, most often shown on a chart; the sizes
10
can be in length or weight.

- Social Costs
Costs associated with the disruption of communities,
households, and related social structures resulting in the
5
loss of human potential.

- Size Limit
A minimum or maximum limit on the size of ﬁsh that
5
may be legally be caught.

- Social Costs and Beneﬁts
Costs and beneﬁts as seen from the perspective of
society as a whole. These differ from private costs and
beneﬁts in being more inclusive (all costs and beneﬁts
borne by some member of society are taken into
account) and in being valued at social opportunity cost
rather than market prices, where these differ. Sometimes
termed “economic” costs and beneﬁts. Compare private
5
costs and beneﬁts.

- Size Samples
Refers to samples taken from the catch (from the
landings) in order to determine the size distribution
of the catches. This information is important for stock
assessments (particularly for age/size-structured
methods) and management advice.5
- Size-at-Age
5
Length or weight at a particular age.
- Size-at-First-Maturity
Length or weight of the ﬁsh when it attains maturity
as deﬁned by: 1) the minimal size at which maturity is
reached; 2) the size at which 50 percent of the ﬁsh of
5
that size is mature.
- Slope
The slope seaward from the shelf edge to the beginning
of a continental rise or the point where there is a general
reduction in slope.5
- Slot Limit
1. A limit on size of ﬁsh that may be kept—allows a
harvester to keep ﬁsh under a minimum size and over a
maximum size, but not those in between the minimum
and maximum; 2. Size limits that allow a harvester
to keep only ﬁsh that fall between a minimum and
maximum size.10
- Small-Scale Producers
Producers operating at a small scale, used to distinguish
from industrialized producers. In truth, the line
46

- Social Discount Rate
The rate used in estimating the present value to society
of an enterprise. It is sometimes held that, to reﬂect
social values, the social discount rate should be lower
5
than the discount rate used in the private sector.
- Social Factors
In addition to factors related to economics such as
beneﬁts, capital, and labor, considerations such as social
structure and social organization, people’s knowledge
and views (norms and values) about their work and how
this relates to the resource. Also referred to as: cultural
5
factors.
- Social Impacts
The changes in people, families, and communities
10
resulting from a ﬁshery management decision.
- Social Impact Assessment
An evaluation of the likely outcomes and impacts of
a speciﬁc policy or regulation on a designated target
group or groups, as well as likely ripple effects to other
5
groups.
- Social Rate of Time Preference
The rate used for discounting future beneﬁts and costs
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

based on the way that society values present, as opposed
to future, consumption; typically one component of the
social discount rate.
- Socio-Economic
Pertaining to the combination or interaction of social
and economic factors and involves topics such as
distributional issues, labor market structure, social and
opportunity costs, community dynamics, and decision5
making processes.
- Socio-Economic Beneﬁts
Beneﬁts to humans gained through utilization of
5
resources, including both economic and social beneﬁts.
- Sonar
An apparatus that uses sound waves to detect objects
underwater by measuring or classifying the echoes
received from them. An echo sounder is a sonar that
transmits vertically. In practice, a sonar is an apparatus
other than an echo sounder, i.e. a sonar transmits
5
horizontally.
- Source
Patches in which birth rates are higher than death rates
and emigration rates are higher than immigration rates,
as applied to equilibrium populations. A more general
deﬁnition is a compartment that, over a large period of
time (e.g. several generations), shows no net change
in population size, but nonetheless is a net exporter of
individuals.14 (see Sink)
- Spatial (Area) Closures
Permanent or seasonal ban of ﬁshing activities in an
area.5
- Spatial Heterogeneity
The non-homogeneous nature of habitats or spatial
distributions of organisms, often ignored in simple
5
models.
- Spawner-Recruit Relationship
The concept that the number of young ﬁsh (recruits)
entering a population is related to the number of parent
ﬁsh (spawners).2 (see Recruitment)
- Spawning
5
Release of ova, fertilized or to be fertilized.
- Spawning Biomass
The total weight of all sexually mature ﬁsh in the
population.
- Spawning Output per Recruit (SPR)
Amount of per capita spawning biomass (or other
JUNE 2006

appropriate measure of reproductive output) obtained
from a given value of ﬁshing mortality, conditional
values of partial recruitment, growth, maturity (and/or
11
fecundity), and natural mortality.
- Spawning Potential Ratio (SPR)
The number of eggs that could be produced by an
average recruit in a ﬁshed stock divided by the number
of eggs that could be produced by an average recruit
in an unﬁshed stock. SPR can also be expressed as the
spawning stock biomass per recruit (SSBR) of a ﬁshed
stock divided by the SSBR of the stock before it was
ﬁshed.2
Comment: SPR’s require information on natural
mortality, growth, spawning potential at age, and the
relative vulnerability by age to ﬁshing. If possible,
spawning potential per recruit is measured in fecundityper-recruit, but often spawning stock biomass per recruit
(SSB/R, see below) is an appropriate substitute. SPR
and SSB/R are simple extensions to yield-per-recruit in
that there are two ways in which recruits can be used:
they can be caught, in which case they are part of the
yield (yield-per-recruit), or they can survive, in which
case they are part of the SPR, SSB/R. SPR is expressed
as a ratio of a ﬁshed condition to an unﬁshed condition,
thus the ratio varies from 0 to 1. Additionally, empirical
studies have shown that for some populations SPR’s in
the order of 20% to 30% may run the risk of recruitment
declines, thus there is a basis of comparison between
populations. Therefore, FX%SPR ﬁshing mortality rates
are sometimes used as biological reference points.
(Note: SPR is sometimes used to mean “spawners per
recruit,” but this usage should be avoided and replaced
by SSB/R). 5
- Spawning Stock
1. Mature part of a stock responsible for reproduction;
2. Strictly speaking, the part of an overall stock having
reached sexual maturity and able to spawn. Often
conventionally deﬁned as the number or biomass of all
individuals beyond “age at ﬁrst maturity” or “size at ﬁrst
maturity”; that is, beyond the age or size class in which
5
50 percent of the individuals are mature.
- Spawning Stock Biomass (SSB)
1. The total weight of all ﬁsh (both males and females)
in the population that contribute to reproduction. Often
conventionally deﬁned as the biomass of all individuals
beyond “age at ﬁrst maturity” or “size at ﬁrst maturity,”
i.e. beyond the age or size class in which 50 percent of
the individuals are mature; 2. The total biomass of ﬁsh
of reproductive age during the breeding season of a
5
stock.

47

Comment: Most often used as a proxy for measuring
egg production, the SSB depends on the abundance of
the various age classes composing the stock and their
past exploitation pattern, rate of growth, ﬁshing and
natural mortality rates, onset of sexual maturity, and
5
environmental conditions.
- Spawning Stock Biomass per Recruit (SSB/R or SBR)
The expected lifetime contribution to the spawning
stock biomass for the average recruit, SSB/R is
calculated assuming that ﬁshing mortality is constant
over the life span of a year class. The calculated value
is also dependent on the exploitation pattern and rates
of growth and natural mortality, all of which are also
assumed to be constant.3
- Spawning Substrate
The type of bottom habitat required by a ﬁsh species for
spawning.5
- Species
Group of animals or plants having common
characteristics, able to breed together to produce fertile
(capable of reproducing) offspring, and maintaining
their “separateness” from other groups.5
- Species Assemblage
Group of species co-occurring in a given area and likely
to be caught together in a given gear.5 (see Species
Group)
- Species Diversity
The variety of species in a community, which can be
expressed quantitatively in ways which reﬂect both the
total number of species present and the extent to which
5
the system is dominated by a small number of species.
(see Biological Diversity)
- Species Group
Group of species considered together, often because they
are difﬁcult to differentiate without detailed examination
(very similar species) or because data for the separate
species are not available (e.g. in ﬁshery statistics or
5
commercial categories). (see Species Assemblage)
- Species Richness
Species richness/abundance is the distribution of the
number of species and the number of individuals of each
species in a community.5
- Spill-Over Eﬀects
Sometimes referred to as externalities, an unintended
effect (positive or negative, beneﬁt or cost) imposed on
others and not borne by the party responsible for the
effect.5
48

- Stability
This term is applied very loosely to ecosystems or
communities, but it usually means their tendency to
retain their essential characteristics in the shorter or
longer term. It sometimes refers to the more particular
capacity of systems to return to their original state
following a disturbance.5
- Stakeholder
1. A large group of individuals and groups of individuals
(including governmental and non-governmental
institutions, traditional communities, universities,
research institutions, development agencies and banks,
donors, etc.) with an interest or claim (whether stated or
implied) that has the potential of being impacted by or
having an impact on a given project and its objectives.
Stakeholder groups that have a direct or indirect “stake”
can be at the household, community, local, regional,
national, or international level; 2. An actor having
a stake or interest in a physical resource, ecosystem
service, institution, or social system, or someone who is
5
or may be affected by a public policy.
- Standard
A criterion (or indicator, or reference point) that
has been formally established and is enforced by an
authority.5
- Standardization (Calibration)
The procedure of maintaining methods and equipment
as constant as possible. Without standardization one
cannot determine whether measurements of yearly
differences in relative abundance are caused by actual
ﬂuctuations in stock abundance or by differences
in the measurement procedure used. The lack of
standardization is one reason why surveys using
different commercial ﬁshing vessels in different years
do not produce comparable information. For example, if
two vessels of different horsepower are used in separate
years, the results cannot be compared unless vessel
mensuration experiments are performed. This would
involve a comparison of the two vessels’ catches to
determine the inﬂuence of their ﬁshing power on the size
6
of the catch, and a determination of a correction factor.
- Standardized
Refers to quantities that have been adjusted to be
directly comparable to a unit that is deﬁned as the
“standard” one. Nominal catch per unit effort (CPUE)
is standardized to remove the effect of factors that are
known not to be related to abundance.5
Comment: This means that the effects of factors such as
vessel size or spatial availability, which clearly affect
CPUE, are removed, e.g. by adjusting all observations
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

to the “standard vessel” in the “standard area.” A variety
of techniques are available for standardization such as
generial linear models (GLMs).5
- Standard Length (SL)
The length of a ﬁsh as measured from the tip of the
snout to the hidden base of the tail ﬁn rays.2
- Standing Stock
1. The total weight of a group (or stock) of living
organisms (e.g. ﬁsh, plankton) or of some deﬁned
fraction of it (e.g. spawners), in an area, at a particular
time. Example: the spawning biomass of the cod stock
on the Georges Bank in 1999; 2. The weight of a ﬁsh
stock, or of some deﬁned portion of it.5 (see Abundance)
- State of Stocks
An appreciation of the situation of a stock, usually
expressed as: protected, underexploited, intensively
exploited, fully exploited, overexploited, depleted,
extinct, or commercially extinct.5
- Stated Preference Methods
General category of valuation methods that includes
contingent choice and contingent valuation techniques.
Individuals are asked to makes choices concerning
their willingness to pay (or accept compensation) for,
rank, or make choices among alternative provisions of
environmental goods.
- States of Nature
A description of a condition and dynamics of the
resource and the ﬁshery, including parameters such as
stock abundance, age structure, ﬁshing mortality, the
economic condition of the industry and the state of the
5
environment.
- Stationary
Things that do not change over time. In ﬁshery science,
refers usually to a parameter or life history characteristic that does not change over time. The concept is
closely related to that of equilibrium, although it is
possible to have one without the other. For example,
yield-per-recruit can be stationary (constant) if the
ﬁshing and natural mortality, exploitation pattern, and
growth remain stationary, but the overall yield can vary
over time if the number of recruits varies.5

criteria for how the observations are ﬁtted. Statistical
models include least squares, maximum likelihood,
Bayesian, and ad hoc procedures.5 (see Least Squares,
Bayesian)
- Status Determination Criteria (SDC)
Objective and measurable criteria used to determine
if a stock is being overﬁshed or is in an overﬁshed
state according to National Standard Guidelines.3 (see
National Standard Guidelines)
- Status of Exploitation
An appraisal of exploitation is given for each stock
using the terms unknown, protected, not exploited,
underexploited, moderately exploited, fully exploited,
and overexploited. These terms describe the effect of
current ﬁshing effort on each stock, and are based on
6
current data and the knowledge of the stocks over time.
- Status Quo
Can mean the general current state of affairs in a
5
ﬁshery.
- Steady State
A population in a steady state may ﬂuctuate about a
mean but does not increase or decline in a systematic
way with time.5
- Stern Trawler
A ﬁshing vessel designed for trawling, in which the nets
are hauled over the stern, up a ramp, or over a roller or
5
the bulwark, with the aid of a derrick or gantry.
- Stochastic
1. Where system components are affected by random
variability. For example, when ﬁshery stock projections
are elaborated, future recruitments are projected with
a stochastic component (i.e. the values introduced in
the projection randomly vary from year to year); 2. A
stochastic model is a model whose behavior is not fully
speciﬁed by its form and parameters, but which contains
an allowance for unexplained effects represented by
random variables.5 (see Deterministic)

- Statistic
The estimate of a parameter, which is obtained by
observation, and which in general is subject to sampling
5
error.

- Stock
A part of a ﬁsh population usually with a particular
migration pattern, speciﬁc spawning grounds, and
subject to a distinct ﬁshery. A ﬁsh stock may be treated
as a total or a spawning stock. Total stock refers to both
juveniles and adults, either in numbers or by weight,
while spawning stock refers to the numbers or weight of
6
individuals that are old enough to reproduce.

- Statistical Model
A component of an estimation model, that deﬁnes the

Comment: In theory, a unit stock is composed of all
the individual ﬁsh in an area that are part of the same

JUNE 2006

49

reproductive process. It is self-contained, with no
emigration or immigration of individuals from or to
the stock. On practical grounds, however, a fraction of
the unit stock is considered a “stock” for management
purposes (or a management unit), as long as the results
of the assessments and management remain close
enough to what they would be on the unit stock.5
- Stock Assessment
The process of collecting and analyzing biological and
statistical information to determine the changes in the
abundance of ﬁshery stocks in response to ﬁshing, and,
to the extent possible, to predict future trends of stock
abundance. Stock assessments are based on resource
surveys; knowledge of the habitat requirements,
life history, and behavior of the species; the use of
environmental indices to determine impacts on stocks;
and catch statistics. Stock assessments are used as a
basis to assess and specify the present and probable
5
future condition of a ﬁshery.
- Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report (SAFE)
A report that provides a summary of the most recent
biological condition of a stock of ﬁsh and the economic
and social condition of the recreational ﬁshermen,
commercial ﬁshermen, and seafood processors who use
the ﬁsh. The report provides information to the ﬁshery
management councils (FMCs) for determining harvest
levels.5
- Stock Structure
1. The spatial organization of a species in terms of the
genetic structure of the species across geographic space
(e.g., a species of large pelagic ﬁsh (tunas) may be
composed of three separate stocks in the North Atlantic,
South Atlantic, and Paciﬁc Ocean); 2. The structure of a
particular stock, in terms of its size or age composition
or in terms of its species composition (for a multispecies
stock).5

50

of recruits is not strongly related to the parent stock size
over the range of stock sizes observed: this situation
is sometimes described as the absence of a stockrecruitment relationship, but is more logically described
as a special case of a stock-recruitment relationship.
Some stock assessment methods incorporate the
estimation of such a relationship directly into the model,
either explicitly (e.g. some age-structured assessments)
or implicitly (most stock production models).5
- Stocking
The practice of putting artiﬁcially reared young ﬁsh
into a sea, lake, or river. These are subsequently caught,
5
preferably at a larger size.
- Straddling Stock
1. A stock which occurs both within the exclusive
economic zone (EEZ) and in an area beyond and
adjacent to the EEZ; 2. Fish stocks that migrate between
5
national EEZs and the high seas.
- Strategy
A statement involving the projections of actions,
including the direction of means, to achieve an
objective.5
- Stratiﬁcation
The separation of the water column into layers, with the
densest at the bottom and the lease dense at the surface,
typically caused by temperature and/or salinity. A
stratiﬁed water column is said to be stable.12 (see Mixed
Layer, Pycnocline, Thermocline)

- Stock-Recruitment Relationship (SRR)
The relationship between the level of parental biomass
(e.g. spawning stock size) and subsequent recruitment
level. Determination of this relationship is useful to
analyze the sustainability of alternative harvesting
regimes and the level of ﬁshing beyond which stock
collapse is likely. The relation is usually blurred by
environmental variability and difﬁcult to determine with
any accuracy.5

- Stratiﬁed Mean (Average) Catch Per Tow
From research vessel surveys, for separate species of
ﬁsh, each average catch per tow, determined from a
series of tows, in each geographic stratum of a region
is multiplied by that area (square nautical miles) of
the stratum in which the tows are made. All of the
individual products are added together and the total
is divided by the sum of the entire area of the region.
The ﬁnal result is stratiﬁed mean catch per tow; this is
used as an index of relative abundance. For example,
a scientist wishes to calculate the stratiﬁed mean catch
per tow of cod in a region (perhaps Georges Bank) that
measures 100 square nautical miles. The region has
been divided into 5 strata on the basis of depth. In each
stratum, 5 tows are made and the average catch of cod is
calculated.6

Comment: Such a relationship always exists in principle,
in that the existence of a parent stock is a prerequisite for
the generation of recruitment. However, in many cases
there exist regulatory mechanisms such that the number

- Submarine Canyon
Submerged earthform consisting of an incised largescale submarine feature on a high angle slope normally
12
associated with the continental shelf.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Submerged Bank
Large, relatively ﬂat shoal or other expansive submerged
feature that is markedly shallower than the surrounding
ocean bottom (e.g. Georges Bank with water depths
between 30 to 50 meters).12

- Super Seiner
A large purse seiner, usually more than 70 meters long
and equipped with considerable freezing and storage
facilities, capable of undertaking extended transoceanic
voyages for harvesting ﬁsh.5

- Subpopulations
Subpopulations are deﬁned as geographically or
otherwise distinct groups in the population between
5
which there is little exchange.

- Supply Function
The relationship between the quantity of good or service
supplied and price.

- Subsidence
The sudden sinking or gradual downward settling of the
12
Earth’s surface with little or no horizontal motion.
- Subsidy
A direct or indirect payment, economic concession,
or privilege granted by a government to private ﬁrms,
households, or other governmental units in order to
5
promote a public objective.
- Subsistence Fishery
A ﬁshery where the ﬁsh caught are shared and consumed
directly by the families and kin of the ﬁshers rather than
being sold at the next larger market.5
- Substitutions
In data processing, refers to the practice of substituting
missing information (e.g. the catch composition of
country A vessels) with an available one (e.g. the catch
composition of country B vessels), assuming some
degree of similarity (e.g. same ﬁshing area, gear, and
practice). Substitutions are often needed to obtain
estimates of the total catch-at-size for a species with
incomplete datasets.5
- Substrate
Seaﬂoor or other solid surface to which animals or
plants attach, or on which they move.5
- Subtidal
Permanently below the level of low tide, an underwater
environment.12
- Summary Settlement
A ticket with a discounted ﬁne that is issued to a
ﬁsherman prior to the issuance of a notice of violation
and assessment (NOVA), offered only in cases where the
violation is not contested. Allows violators to quickly
resolve their case without incurring the expense of the
legal process. Any property that was seized is forfeited
10
by paying the penalty. (see Notice of Violation and
Assessment)

JUNE 2006

- Supply Gluts
A situation in which the market is supplied with an
unusually large amount of product, which strains the
capacity of primary buyers, processors, and wholesalers
and causes prices to drop to very low levels.5
- Support
Any operation by a vessel assisting ﬁshing by foreign
or national vessels, including supplying water, fuel,
provisions, ﬁsh processing equipment, or other supplies
to a ﬁshing vessel.5
- Supporting Ecosystem Services
Supporting ecosystem services are those services (e.g.
primary production, oxygen production, soil formation)
that are necessary for the production of all other
ecosystem services (e.g. food, employment, recreation,
5
erosion control, etc.).
- Supporting Services
Ecosystem services those are necessary for the
production of all other ecosystem services. Some
examples include biomass production, production of
atmospheric oxygen, soil formation and retention,
nutrient cycling, water cycling, and provisioning of
5
habitat.
- Supratidal
Above the level of high tide; a terrestrial environment
that is inﬂuenced by proximity to the sea, including
inﬂuency by sea spray, sea breezes, and aeolian
processes, and geological and biological “spillover”
such as dune development.12
- Surface (Mixed) Layer
The upper layer of water that is mixed by wind, waves,
and currents.12
- Surface Runoﬀ
The ﬂow across the land of water that accumulates
on the land surface when the rainfall rate exceeds the
12
inﬁltration capacity of the soil.

51

- Surface Water
All water naturally open to the atmosphere, including
rivers, lakes, reservoirs, streams, impoundments, seas,
estuaries, and so on. The term also covers springs, wells
or other collectors of water that are directly inﬂuenced
5
by surface waters.
- Surimi
Protein paste derived from processing raw ﬁsh, primarily
Alaska (walleye) pollock and Paciﬁc whiting (hake).
Surimi can be combined with ﬂavoring agents and other
substances and extruded to create marketable foodstuffs
(e.g. imitation crab meat).13
- Surplus Production
1. The amount of biomass produced by the stock
(through growth and recruitment) over and above that
which is required to maintain the total stock biomass
at a constant level between consecutive time periods;
2. Production of new biomass by a ﬁshable stock, plus
recruits added to it, less what is removed by natural
mortality. This is usually estimated as the catch in a
given year plus the increase in stock size (or less the
decrease). Also called: natural increase, sustainable
yield, and equilibrium catch.5
- Surplus Production Model
Mathematical representation of the way a stock of ﬁsh
responds to the removal of its individuals (for example
by ﬁshing). In ﬁsheries, usually represented by a
relationship between yield and/or catch per unit effort
5
(CPUE) and ﬁshing effort or mortality.
- Survey Design
The overall survey design refers to the deﬁnitions and
the established methods and procedures concerning all
phases needed for conducting the survey: the sample
design, the selection and training of personnel, the
logistics involved in the management of the ﬁeld force,
the distribution and receipt of survey questionnaires and
forms, and the procedures for data collection, processing
5
and analysis.
- Survival Rate
Number of ﬁsh alive after a speciﬁed time interval,
divided by the initial number. Usually on a yearly
basis.5
- Survival Ratio
1. Ratio of recruits to spawners (or parental biomass) in
a stock-recruitment analysis. Changes in survival ratios
indicate that the productivity of a stock is changing;
2. Number of ﬁsh alive after a speciﬁed time interval,
divided by the initial number. Usually calculated on a
yearly basis.5
52

- Sustainability
1. Ability to persist in the long-term. Often used
as “short hand” for sustainable development; 2.
Characteristic of resources that are managed so that
the natural capital stock is non-declining through time,
while production opportunities are maintained for the
future.5
- Sustainability Indicators
A variable, a pointer, an index of a complex
phenomenon. Its ﬂuctuations reveal the variations
in components of the ecosystem, the resource, or
the sector. The position and trend of the indicator in
relation to the criteria indicate the present state and
dynamics of the system. Ideally, composite indicators
are needed, the position and trajectory of which, within
a system of reference of related criteria, would allow
simple holistic assessment of sustainability. One can
distinguish indicators of state of the system, pressure
(or stress, driving forces) on the system, and response
(reﬂecting action taken to mitigate, reduce, eliminate, or
5
compensate for the stress).
- Sustainable Catch (Yield)
The number (weight) of ﬁsh in a stock that can be taken
by ﬁshing without reducing the stock biomass from year
to year, assuming that environmental conditions remain
6
the same.
- Sustainable Development
1. Management and conservation of the natural
resource base, and the orientation of technological and
institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the
attainment of continued satisfaction of human needs
for present and future generations. Such sustainable
development conserves land and water, plant and animal
genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading,
technologically appropriate, economically viable, and
socially acceptable; 2. Development that meets the needs
of the present generation without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.5
- Sustainable Fishing
Fishing activities that do not cause or lead to undesirable
changes in the biological and economic productivity,
biological diversity, or ecosystem structure and
functioning from one human generation to the next.5
Comment: Fishing is sustainable when it can be
conducted over the long-term at an acceptable level of
biological and economic productivity without leading
to ecological changes that foreclose options for future
generations.5

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Sustainable Fisheries Act (SFA)
The SFA is a statute enacted in 1996 which amended
the Magnuson-Stevens Act. Among its provisions were
mandatory oveﬁshing elimination and stock rebuilding,
the establishment of a program to protect essential ﬁsh
habitat, and the establishment of a new national standard
for bycatch reduction.8

meant to be the stock of inputs (i.e. physical capital and
human capital). The term “fully-utilized” is used in a
precautionary context in that it is assumed that capacity
utilization is 100%. The maximum catch that capital
stocks could remove can be determined by observing
the ﬁshery under study during a period with few
restrictions.5

- Sustainable Use
The use of components of biological diversity in a way
and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline
of biological diversity, thereby maintaining its potential
to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future
5
generations.

- Target Reference Point (TRP)
1. Benchmarks used to guide management objectives
for achieving a desirable outcome (e.g. optimum yield,
OY). Target reference points should not be exceeded
on average3; 2. Corresponds to a state of a ﬁshery or
a resource that is considered desirable. Management
action, whether during a ﬁshery development or a
stock rebuilding process, should aim at bringing the
ﬁshery system to this level and maintaining it there. In
most cases a TRP will be expressed in a desired level
of output for the ﬁshery (e.g. in terms of catch) or of
ﬁshing effort or capacity, and will be reﬂected as an
explicit management objective for the ﬁshery.5

- Sustainable Yield
1. Equilibrium yield; 2. The amount of biomass or
the number of units that can be harvested currently
in a ﬁshery without compromising the ability of the
5
population/ecosystem to regenerate itself.
- Sustained Use
Continuing use without severe or permanent
5
deterioration in the resources.
- Systems Analysis
The analysis and modeling of interrelated processes and
operations with a view to designing a more efﬁcient use
of resources.5

T
- Tagging
Marking an individual or group of individuals (e.g. by
clipping a ﬁn, injecting a die, inserting a tag) in order
to identify it when recaptured. Tagging allows the
study of growth, mortality, and migration as well as the
5
estimation of the stock size.
- Target Fishing
Fishing for the primary purpose of catching a particular
1
species or species group. (see Target Species)
- Target Fishing Capacity
The maximum amount of ﬁsh over a period of time
(year, season) that can be produced by a ﬁshing ﬂeet
if fully utilized while satisfying ﬁshery management
objectives designed to ensure sustainable ﬁsheries:
YT = Y (ET, S) in which YT is target yield or catch;
ET is target effort generated by a fully-utilized ﬂeet;
and S is stock size (biomass). The “ﬁshing ﬂeet” is
JUNE 2006

- Target Species
Those species primarily sought by the ﬁshermen in a
particular ﬁshery. The subject of directed ﬁshing effort
in a ﬁshery. There may be primary as well as secondary
target species.5
- Target Strength
The ratio of received signal to transmitted signal from
an object as at 1 meter from the transmitter, expressed in
decibels.
- Technological Interaction
An interaction between ﬁsheries resulting from the
impact of one ﬁshery using a particular technology (e.g.
trawl gear) on another ﬁshery, usually using a different
technology (e.g. pots), but exploiting the same resources
as target or bycatch. Because of their importance, the
cross-impact of various ﬂeets targeting overlapping
species groups must be assessed. Major source of
failure in total allowable catches (TACs) and quotas
management strategies for multispecies and multigear
5
ﬁsheries.
- Temperate Waters
Waters in the region of higher (cooler; more pole-ward)
latitudes than tropical latitudes; literally those between
the Tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle in the
northern hemisphere, and the Tropic of Capricorn and
the Antarctic Circle in the southern hemisphere.5
- Tenure
Socially-deﬁned agreements held by individuals or
groups (either recognized by law or customary norms)
53

on the rights of access and the rules for use of either
a land area or associated resources such as individual
trees, plant species, water, or animals.5
- Terminal F
In a stock assessment (e.g. a virtual population analysis),
refers to ﬁshing mortality values in the last year for
5
which data are available.
- Terrace
A relatively ﬂat horizontal or gently inclined surface,
sometimes long and narrow, which is bounded by a
steeper ascending slope on one side and by a steeper
5
descending slope on the opposite side.
- Territorial Sea
Extends 12 nautical miles offshore of the United States.
States exercise authority over marine ﬁsheries in waters
from the coastline to 3 nautical miles offshore, and out
to 9 nautical miles for Texas, Puerto Rico, and the Gulf
coast of Florida.1
- Thermocline
Region below the surface layer of the sea or lake, where
the temperature gradient increases abruptly (i.e. where
temperature decreases rapidly with increasing depth). A
thermocline may reach the surface and become a front.
It is usually an ecological barrier, and its oscillations
have signiﬁcant consequences on stock distribution
5
and ocean productivity. (see Mixed Layer, Pycnocline,
Stratiﬁcation)
- Threshold Reference Point (ThRP)
Indicates that the state of a ﬁshery and/or a resource is
approaching a target reference point (TRP) or a limit
reference point (LRP), and that a certain type of action
(usually agreed beforehand) needs to be taken. Fairly
similar to a LRP in their utility, the ThRP speciﬁc
purpose is to provide an early warning, reducing
further the risk that the LRP or TRP are inadvertently
passed due to uncertainty in the available information
or inherent inertia of the management and industry
systems. Adding precaution to the management setup,
they might be necessary only for resources or situations
involving particularly high risk.5
- Thresholds
1. Levels of environmental indicators beyond which a
system undergoes signiﬁcant changes; points at which
stimuli provoke signiﬁcant response; 2. A point or
level at which new properties emerge in an ecological,
economic, or other system, invalidating predictions
based on mathematical relationships that apply at lower
levels. For example, species diversity of a landscape
may decline steadily with increasing habitat degradation
54

to a certain point, and then fall sharply after a critical
threshold of degradation is reached. Human behavior,
especially at group levels, sometimes exhibits threshold
effects. Thresholds at which irreversible changes occur
are especially of concern to decision-makers.5
- Tidal Current
An alternating, horizontal movement of water associated
with the rise and fall of the tide, these movements
being caused by gravitational forces due to the relative
motions of Moon, Sun, and Earth.12
- Tidal Flat
Level, muddy surface bordering an estuary, alternately
submerged and exposed to the air by changing tidal
5
levels.
- Tidal Marsh
Low, ﬂat marshland traversed by channels and tidal
hollows and subject to tidal inundation. Normally, the
only vegetation present are salt-tolerant bushes and
5
grasses.
- Tidal Range
The difference in water level between successive high
12
and low tides.
- Tidal Wetlands
A coastal area that experiences periodic inundation as a
12
result of daily tides.
- Top-Down Management
A process of management in which management
information and decisions are centralized and resource
users are kept outside the decision-making process.5
- TMAX
The maximum time period to rebuild an overﬁshed
stock, according to National Standard Guidelines.
Depends on biological, environmental, and legal/policy
factors.1 (see National Standard Guidelines)
- TMIN
The minimum time period to rebuild an overﬁshed stock,
according to National Standard Guidelines. Technically,
this is the minimum amount of time in which a ﬁsh
stock will have a 50% chance of rebuilding if no ﬁshing
occurs (depends on biological and environmental
factors).1 (see National Standard Guidelines)
- Total Allowable Catch (TAC)
The annual recommended or speciﬁed regulated catch
for a species or species group. The regional ﬁshery
management council sets the TAC from the range of
acceptable biological catch (ABC).2
NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Total Catch
Total catch (optimum yield, OY). The landed catch plus
discard mortality.1
- Total Economic Value Framework
A framework that incorporates all components of
economic value, including use value (consumptive and
non-consumptive use) and non-use value (option, quasioption, and existence values).
- Total Length (TL)
The length of a ﬁsh deﬁned as the straight-line distance
from the tip of the snout to the tip of the tail (caudal ﬁn)
5
while the ﬁsh is lying on its side, normally extended.
- Total Maximum Daily Load
The amount of pollutant that a water body can receive
and still meet water quality standards. Set by the
Environmental Protection Agency.1
- Total Mortality (Z)
1. A measurement of the rate of removal of ﬁsh from
a population by both ﬁshing and natural causes.
Total mortality can be reported as either annual or
instantaneous. Annual mortality is the percentage of
ﬁsh dying in 1 year. Instantaneous mortality is that
percentage of ﬁsh dying at any one time2; 2. The sum of
5
natural (M) and ﬁshing (F) mortality rates.
- Total Welfare
The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus.9
(see Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus)
- Tradable Permits
An economic policy instrument under which rights
to discharge pollution or exploit resources can be
exchanged through either a free or a controlled -permitmarket. Examples include individual transferable quotas
(ITQs) in ﬁsheries, tradable depletion rights to mineral
concessions and marketable discharge permits for
waterborne efﬂuents.5
- Trade Analysis
Economic analysis of the trade of goods and services
between countries.9
- Trade-Oﬀ
A balancing of factors all of which are not attainable at
the same time (e.g. maximum economic yield, MEY, and
maximum sustainable yield, MSY). A giving up of one
thing in return for another.5
Comment: Sustainability can be evaluated by the sum
of the various social, economic, and natural resources
where the degree of use, exchange, and trading among
JUNE 2006

resources will vary according to the values given
to each. The understanding of social dynamics and
resource-use systems and the evaluation of related tradeoffs, in terms of equity, productivity, resilience, and
environmental stability, are useful to envision alternative
5
development scenarios.
- Tradeoﬀs
Compromises among resource uses that are required
because some bundles of entitlements defy divisibility/
separability.5
- Traditional Rights
Rights of indigenous or traditional people which (to
present) have not been considered in a national and
international context or have not (yet) been recorded,
and which are based on the legal system of the
5
individual cultures.
- Tragedy of the Commons
The overuse of a resource resulting from a lack of
assigned and enforceable property rights.
- Transaction Costs
1. In the context of a market exchange of goods and
services, transaction costs include the costs of time,
effort, and other resources necessary to search out,
negotiate, and consummate an exchange. In a resource
management context, transaction costs include the
costs of describing the principal elements of a ﬁshery
(resource, producers, processors, markets), and
designing, implementing, monitoring, and enforcing
regulation; 2. Collection of costs involved with
gathering information on, and otherwise delineating,
a resource; establishing contracts (formal or informal)
that deﬁne the entitlement; monitoring and enforcing the
entitlement.5
- Transboundary Stocks
Stocks of ﬁsh that migrate across international
boundaries or, in the case of the United States, across
the boundaries between states or ﬁshery management
council (FMC) areas of control.5
- Transferred Species
Transplanted species. Any species intentionally or
accidentally transported and released by humans into an
environment inside its present range. Also referred to as
a “Transfer.”5
- Transgenic
Organisms whose genetic makeup includes a gene or
genes from another genus or species.5

55

- Transshipment
Transfer of product from one ship to another at sea for
further transport.13
- Transitional
Relates usually to the more or less abrupt passage
(or evolution) from one state, stage, subject, or place
to another. In ﬁshery science, refers to what happens
between two equilibrium states corresponding to two
different ﬁshing regimes (i.e. the non-equilibrium
trajectory between two states).5
Comment: Transitional situations may be extremely
important in terms of comparing performance of
different management options. For example, equilibrium
yield analyses might indicate that a given regulation will
increase equilibrium yield by, say, twofold. However,
the transition between the two levels of yield will
actually involve a short-term loss in yield, and hence
5
may meet with stakeholders’ resistance.
- Translocation
Movement of native or introduced (exotic) species
to waters or habitats outside their natural or previous
distribution.5
Transnational Fisheries
Fisheries in which the same resource stock(s) crosses
the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of two or more
5
countries.
- Transparency
The openness of governance processes and decisionmaking to stakeholders and the public.
- Transshipment
1. Act of transferring the catch from one ﬁshing vessel
to either another ﬁshing vessel or to a vessel used solely
for the carriage of cargo; 2. Off loading and on loading
or otherwise transferring ﬁsh or ﬁsh products and/or
transporting ﬁsh or products made from ﬁsh.5
- Trap Fishing
Fishing by means of devices able to trap ﬁsh in a
conﬁned environment (traps, pots) often designed and
baited to catch a particular species—crab pot, lobster
pot, tuna trap, fyke nets.5
- Trawl Net
Towed net consisting of a cone-shaped body closed by
a bag or codend and extended at the opening by wings.
It can be towed by one or two boats and, according to
the type, used on the bottom or in midwater (pelagic).
In certain cases, as in trawling for shrimp or ﬂatﬁsh, the

56

trawler can be specially rigged with outriggers to tow up
5
to four trawls at the same time (double rigging).
- Trawling
Fishing technique in which a net is dragged behind the
vessel and retrieved when full of ﬁsh. This technique is
used extensively in the harvest of pollock, cod, and other
ﬂatﬁsh in North Paciﬁc and New England ﬁsheries. It
includes botto- and midwater ﬁshing activities.13
- Trench
A long, narrow, characteristically very deep and
asymmetrical depression of the sea ﬂoor, with relatively
5
steep sides.
- Trip Limits
A quota that each ﬁsher or vessel is allowed to catch per
trip out to sea. Trip limits are the commercial equivalent
of a recreational bag limit.
- Troller
A vessel used for catching pelagic ﬁsh by towing a
number of lines ﬁtted with lures.5
- Trolling
A surface and subsurface ﬁshing method in which lines
with baits or lures are dragged by a vessel at a speed of
2–10 knots. Trolling is used to catch tuna and tuna-like
ﬁsh.5
- Trophic Group
Group of organisms eating resources from a similar level
in the energy cycle.5
- Trophic Level
1. Classiﬁcation of natural communities or organisms
according to their place in the food chain. Green
plants (producers) can be roughly distinguished from
herbivores (consumers) and carnivores (secondary
Syn: Trophic group consumers); 2. Group of organisms
eating resources from a similar level in the energy cycle;
3. Position in food chain determined by the number
of energy-transfer steps to that level. Plant producers
constitute the lowest level, followed by herbivores and
a series of carnivores at the higher levels.5 (see Food
Chain, Predator-Prey Relationship)
- TTARGET
The target year set by policy for a ﬁsh stock to be
1
completely rebuilt.
- Tuning
Improving the ﬁt between observed and calculated data
5
using a mathematical (stock assessment) model.

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Turtle Excluder Device (TED)
A gear modiﬁcation used on shrimp trawls that enables
incidentally caught sea turtles to escape from the nets.

- Underﬁshed
Characteristic of a stock that may sustain catches higher
than current ones.5

- Two-pie System
Form of quota allocation in which both harvesters and
processors are allocated shares of quota. The harvester
and processor allocations would be transferable within
but not between each category.13

- Undersized
Fish (caught) at a size smaller than the minimum size
limit established by regulation.5

- Typographic Features
The relief features of the Earth’s surface, above and
below sea level; the set of landforms in a region.12
- Turbidity
The condition resulting from the presence of suspended
particles in the water column which attenuate or reduce
12
light penetration.

U
- Unblocked Quota
Quota shares in the Alaskan halibut and sableﬁsh
individual ﬁshing quota (IFQ) programs that are allowed
to be subdivided when transferred. There are limits
on the total number of unblocked quota shares that an
individual may own.13 (see Blocked Quota)
- Uncertainty
1. In general, the incompleteness of knowledge about the
states and processes in nature5; 2. In statistics and risk
analysis, refers to the estimated amount (or percentage)
by which an observed or calculated value may differ
from the true value; 3. Lack of perfect knowledge of
many factors that affect stock assessments, estimation of
5
biological reference points, and management.
Comment: Sources of uncertainty include measurement
error (in observed quantities), process error (or natural
population variability (e.g. in recruitment), model error
(misspeciﬁcation of assumed values or population model
structure), estimation error (in population parameters
or reference points, due to any of the preceding types
of errors), and implementation error (or the inability to
implement management controls for whatever reason).5
- UNCLOS
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Adopted in 1982. Entered into force in 1994.5

JUNE 2006

- Underutilized Species
A species of ﬁsh that has potential for large additional
harvest.5
- Undeveloped Fishery
A ﬁshery in its very early stage of development, with
very low levels of ﬁshing effort, producing much lower
5
quantities of ﬁsh than its potential maximum yield.
- Unit Stock
A population of ﬁsh grouped together for assessment
purposes, which may or may not include all the ﬁsh in a
stock.5 (see Stock)
- Unregulated Fishery
A ﬁshery in which producers (and any other participants)
are not subjected to any regulations.5
- Upland
An area that is higher relative to the surrounding areas,
but not mountainous.12
- Upwelling
Upward movement of cool and nutrient-rich subsurface
waters towards the surface often leading to exceptionally
rich areas. There exist various types of upwelling. For
ﬁsheries, the most important type is the wind-induced
coastal upwelling where the upward movement is a
consequence of wind stress (along shore) and Eckman
5
transport (offshore).
- Usable Stock
The number or weight of all ﬁsh in a stock that lie
within the range of sizes customarily considered usable
(or designated so by law). Also called: standing crop.5
- Use Rights
Rights for the use of resources that can be deﬁned by
local custom, mutual agreements, or prescribed by other
entities holding access rights. These rights may restrict
the use of particular resources to speciﬁc levels of
5
consumption or particular harvesting techniques.
- User
The term includes a commercial, recreational, and
indigenous ﬁsher; ﬁsh watcher (scuba diver); and

57

a member of the community. What constitutes a
“signiﬁcant user interest” must be decided on in a caseby-case basis.5
- User Group
A group of individuals that utilize a resource in a
speciﬁc manner such as inshore lobster ﬁshermen.5 (see
Stakeholder)
- User-Pays Principle (UPP)
The UPP states that the price of a natural resource
should reﬂect the full range of costs involved in using
it, including the costs of the external effects associated
with exploiting, transforming, and using the resource,
together with the cost of the future uses forgone. It
follows that the price for the use of a resource should
be the full long-run marginal social cost of using
it, including the external costs associated with its
development and any resultant pollution prevention and
5
control activities.
- Utility
1. The level of welfare that a person gets from
consuming a good or undertaking an activity; 2. In
economics, the measure of the degree of satisfaction or
5
happiness of a person.
- Utilized Stock
The part, by number, of the ﬁsh alive at a given time,
5
which will be caught in future.

V
- Valuation
The process of expressing a value for a particular good
or service in a certain context (e.g. of decision-making)
usually in terms of something that can be counted, often
money, but also through methods and measures from
other disciplines (sociology, ecology, and so on).5
- Value
1. Market and nonmarket values, gross and net values,
and net beneﬁts to consumers or goods and services; 2.
The contribution of an action or object to user-speciﬁed
goals, objectives, or conditions.5
- Value Added
The dollar value of a ﬁrm’s output (i.e. harvest) minus
the dollar value of the inputs it purchases from other
9
ﬁrms.

58

- Values
5
Ideals, customs, and beliefs of a given society.
- Variable
Anything changeable. A quantity that varies or may
vary. Part of a mathematical expression that may assume
any value.5
- Variable Costs
9
Costs that vary with the level of output.
- Vertical Integration
A ﬁshery (or industry) is vertically integrated when
ﬁrms in the ﬁshery engage in multiple levels of the
supply chain. For example, a ﬁrm that operates and
manages ﬁshing vessels, processing plants, and a
wholesale distribution operation is considered vertically
5
integrated.
- Vessel Catch Limits
A limit on the quantity each individual vessel can land
5
per trip or short period of time (e.g. day, week).
- Vessel Class
Commercial ﬁshing vessels are classiﬁed according
to their gross registered tons (GRT) of displacement.
Vessels displacing less than 5 GRT are not routinely
6
monitored, and are referred to as undertonnage.
- Vessel Monitoring System (VMS)
A satellite communications system used to monitor
ﬁshing activities—for example, to ensure that vessels
stay out of prohibited areas. The system is based on
electronic devices (transceivers), which are installed on
board vessels. These devices automatically send data to
1
a shore-based “satellite” monitoring system.
- Vessel Operator
The master or other individual aboard and in charge of
5
that vessel.
- Vessel Owner
Any person who owns a vessel in whole or in part;
any charter of the vessel, whether bare boat, time,
or voyage; any person who acts in the capacity of
a charterer, including, but not limited to, parties to
a management agreement, operating agreement, or
any similar agreement that bestows control over the
destination, function, or operation of the vessel; or any
agent designated as such by a person described in this
deﬁnition.5

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

- Virgin Biomass (B0)
The average biomass of a stock that has yet not
been ﬁshed (in an equilibrium sense). Biomass of
an unexploited (or quasi unexploited) stock. Rarely
measured. Most often inferred from stock modeling.
Used as a reference value to assist the relative health of
a stock, monitoring changes in the ratio between current
and virgin biomass (B/B0). It is usually assumed that,
in absence of better data, B = 0.30 B0 is a limit below
which a stock should not be driven.
Comment: Virgin Biomass corresponds to a stock’s
theoretical carrying capacity.5
- Virgin Stock
A stock of ﬁsh with no commercial or recreational
harvest. A virgin stock changes only in relation to
environmental factors and its own growth, recruitment,
and natural mortality.2
- Virtual Population Analysis (VPA)
A retrospective analysis of the catches from a given year
class which provides estimates of ﬁshing mortality and
stock size at each age over its life in the ﬁshery. This
technique is used extensively in ﬁshery assessments.3
(see Cohort Analysis)
- Viscosity
1. The property of resistance to ﬂow in a ﬂuid or semi
ﬂuid. By analogy, in ﬁsheries: the property of resistance
of elements of a stock to move and mix together. As a
consequence of stock “viscosity,” mixing of individuals
is neither complete nor instantaneous and the transfer of
the local impact of ﬁshing to the entire stock (through
directional or turbulent mixing) is a function of the
stock´s “viscosity.” If there is zero mixing, the viscosity
is inﬁnite. Because of lack of data on mixing rates,
the term “viscosity” is often used only in a qualitative
fashion.5
- Vital Rates
Rates (such as natural mortality, fecundity, and growth
rates) affecting the dynamics of a stock.5
- Vulnerability
A term equivalent to catchability (q) but usually applied
to separate parts of a stock, for example those of a
particular size, or those living in a particular part of the
range.5

W
- Waste
Physical waste is product that is caught but does not
have market value. It is a byproduct of the production
process that is not utilized.
- Water Column
The vertical column of seawater that extends from the
12
surface to the bottom.
- Water Mass
A body of water that can be identiﬁed by its temperature
12
and salinity.
- Water Pollution
Presence in water of harmful and objectionable
material—obtained from sewers, industrial wastes, and
rainwater runoff—in sufﬁcient concentrations to make it
unﬁt for use.
- Water Quality
The chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of
water in respect to its suitability for a particular purpose.
- Water Quality Criteria
Speciﬁc levels of water quality desired for identiﬁed
uses, including drinking, recreation, farming, ﬁsh
production, propagation of other aquatic life, and
agricultural and industrial processes.
- Water Resources
Water usable as inputs for economic production and
livelihoods. A distinction is made between renewable
and nonrenewable water resources. Nonrenewable
water resources are not replenished at all or for a very
long time by nature. This includes the so-called fossil
waters. Renewable water resources are rechargeable due
to the hydrological cycle unless they are overexploited,
comprising groundwater aquifers and surface water like
rivers and lakes.
- Watershed
The areas which supplies water by surface and
subsurface ﬂow from rain to a given point in the
drainage system.
- Weight-at-Age
The average individual weight of the ﬁsh in each age
class of a particular stock.

JUNE 2006

59

- Welfare
The prosperity or, more broadly, the well being of a
person or group.

Z

- Wetland
Partially or permanently ﬂooded, soft bottom ﬂat that is
vegetated by vascular plants.12

- Zero Opportunity Costs
Where the next best income alternative yields zero
additional earnings.5

Y

- Zero Mortality Rate Goal (ZMRG)
A goal stated in the Marine Mammal Protection
Act (MMPA) that the “incidental kill or incidental
serious injury of marine mammals permitted in the
course of commercial ﬁshing operations be reduced to
insigniﬁcant levels approaching a zero mortality and
serious injury rate.”1

- Year Class
Fish in a stock born in the same year. For example,
the 1987 year class of cod includes all cod born in
1987. This year class would be age 1 in 1988, age 2
in 1989, and so on. Occasionally, a stock produces a
very small or very large year class that can be pivotal
in determining stock abundance in later years.3 (see
Cohort)
- Yield
1. The yield curve is the relationship between the
expected yield and the level of ﬁshing mortality or
(sometimes) ﬁshing effort; 2. Catch in weight. Catch
and yield are often used interchangeably. Amount of
production per unit area over a given time. A measure of
5
agricultural production.
- Yield per Recruit (Y/R or YPR)
1. A model that estimates yield in terms of weight,
but more often as a percentage of the maximum yield,
for various combinations of natural mortality, ﬁshing
2
mortality, and time exposed to the ﬁshery ; 2. The
average expected yield in weight from a single recruit.
Y/R is calculated assuming that ﬁshing mortality is
constant over the life span of a year class. The calculated
value is also dependent on the exploitation pattern, rate
of growth, and natural mortality rate, all of which are
3
assumed to be constant.

- Zoning
A process in which a protected area is divided into
discrete zones and particular human uses of each zone is
permitted, often with conditions such as gear limitations
in ﬁshing and waste discharge prohibitions in tourism.14
- Zooplankton
Non-photosynthetic, heterotrophic planktonic
organsisms, including protists, small animals, and
12
larvae, which exist within the water column. (see
Phytoplankton)

- 602 Guidelines
Rules for ﬁshery management plans (FMPs); require
an FMP to deﬁne overﬁshing, to specify measures to
prevent overﬁshing, and to establish a program for
rebuilding a stock if overﬁshing already exists.10

- Yield-per-Recruit Analysis
Analysis of how growth, natural mortality, and ﬁshing
interact to determine the best size of animals at which
to start ﬁshing them, and the most appropriate level of
ﬁshing mortality. The yield-per-recruit models do not
consider the possibility of changes in recruitment (and
reproductive capacity) due to change in stock size. They
also do not deal with environmental impacts.5

60

NOAA FISHERIES GLOSSARY

